I guess that's why I'm hopeful about this. I think we're gonna find the importance of
– I just like the way you put that. I think we're gonna find the importance of having
a voluntary tribe to be able to pick and choose what tribes we are. And that really satisfies
the old program. It gives it something to do. It satisfies its needs. But it doesn't
create, you know, the massive collective of one single tribe that's, you know, kind of,
like I said, steamrolling over everyone else. And that's the real tragedy of the 20th century
was that that one tribe got so big and then it got so massive and it was capable of inflicting
so much damage that we don't want to have any one tribe get that big again.
Chris Nebar, welcome back to the New Human Podcast, this time the 95th episode.
Hey, so great to be here. First, let me start off. Thank you so much for copying the book.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's really awesome. You really need to have in paperback. It feels good. The art is amazing.
So this is such a – so cool to be part of that. I really enjoyed it.
Yeah, Chris was nice enough to write a foreword for my first book, which is a poetry book.
And I also work with a great Japanese artist, Takamoto Mamiko. So yeah, I appreciate you
promoting the book. Let me promote your book, Chris Nebar's book that basically brought
us together, No Self, No Problem, How Neuro-Psychology is Catching Up to Buddhism. And I remember
you were saying that you're working also on a new book, right?
It's a collection of exercises, because one of the things in the first book people realize
is like, you can't think your way out of a thinking problem. So I don't want to just
take a bunch of thoughts and philosophy and expect that to really transform people. So
we switch things around. It's just exercise after exercise. Some of them seem silly almost
to the thinking mind, but they're all trying to get us out of – I don't say get us out
of thinking mind, but put the thinking mind in its proper place. It's a useful tool.
We wouldn't want to get rid of it. It helps me remember where I left my keys. It helps
me solve problems. But you probably only need it maybe a couple hours a day at best. And
the problem is most people, they don't have an off switch. So they're sleeping – trying
to get to sleep. And unfortunately, that program is still going.
And so this one – so not only does it focus on the exercises, but it takes us a little
further back. What was the origins of mind? Did it just turn on 200 years ago? And I started
doing some really deep work in anthropology and discovered some very fascinating things
about our species. And so it takes us all the way back 200 – 2 million years ago when
human beings showed up on the scene. And then it takes us through when Homo sapiens showed
up. And a lot of the theory is around what happened to us as Homo sapiens. So a lot of
us don't realize that there were eight different types of humans on the planet. And that was
really just up until like Homo erectus was on the planet for 2 million years. Homo sapiens,
we just came along like 200,000 years ago. So we just got here. And then this wild thing
happened where we just dominated, completely took over the whole planet, exterminated possibly
except there's other theories. But we may have just terminated all the different forms
of humanity. And now we're left. And so the theory tries to suggest that the reason
we were so successful is because the way the mind works. And the mind was good at strategizing,
it's good at categorization, some of the stuff I'm sure we'll talk about today.
But those were all super advantages in terms of our species. These other – the Homo erectus
may have been able to think and reason a little bit, but they didn't have the tools that
we had in terms of creating groups, in-group and out-groups. And so even though we were
physically smaller, you know, let's say than Neanderthal, but it didn't matter because
if you get 10 of us working together as a group, we'll still be able to take out that
one much larger individual. And so it tries to give people a backstory on this thinking
point. Where did it come from? Why is it so hard to turn off, you know? And it's trying
to solve problems like – it's trying to solve problems that we had 100,000 years ago.
So it's dealing with, you know, glaciers and food supply and, you know, extreme changes
in temperature. And now all of a sudden we're in a place like – we created a world that
has almost no temperature change at all with air conditioning and heat. Most of us, many
of us, live between like, you know, 68 and 72 degrees or something. And so what does
the mind have to do? You know, what does it have to do? And so what it does is it still
finds its meaning in finding problems. So it is out there when it can't find a problem,
it creates one. In fact, I'll send you another link. It's maybe one of the most important
papers. I don't know if you've seen it or maybe we've talked about it, but it demonstrated
this so beautifully, experimentally, that the mind is just creating problems. And it
will redefine what a problem is if its first problem changes or say you solve the first
problem. It will redefine the problem so it continuously has something to do. And so they
gave subjects a task. Just hit a key every time a blue dot comes up. And it was blue
dots and they would go all the way from blue to purple. And eventually they just stopped
showing blue dots. And you'd think, well, the subject should just stop responding. You
know, here's my target. It's not there anymore. I stopped responding. But they didn't. They
changed the definition of blue. So they started responding to purple dots. And that's kind
of cool. But the next two studies, really, it's worth just giving you a short description
of because it's going to be relevant to, I think, our whole discussion. But in another
study, what they had is bright faces that look threatening. So they're a really threatening
face. But then it really went all the way to like a neutral or maybe completely non-threatening
face. But the first task was hit a key every time you see a threatening, this particular
threatening face. And then just like before, they stopped showing threatening faces. And
again, people didn't stop responding. They just changed what a threatening face is. So
suddenly this face that's neutral, now they think that that's a threat. And the last one,
I think, again, maybe that was the most relevant one to some of the stuff we're dealing with.
They said, pick, so you're going to be a researcher and you're evaluating the ethics on this research
proposal. And they would throw in huge ethical flaws. And your task is to catch the ethical
flaw. And so, of course, everyone was pretty good at this. Then they removed the ethical
flaws. And again, instead of not responding anymore, like, hey, problem solved, people
changed the definition of what an ethical problem is. And they would continuously.
And here's the most beautiful part about this study. They went and told people, like, look,
we're going to stop the problem. We're going to stop showing you the target. Had no effect.
Then they paid people to be correct. So you think, look, I'm going to get paid if I'm
just accurate. Had no effect on performance. It's so set on redefining what a problem is
that and I think that's one of the things we're dealing with right now.
So many of our problems that our mind, the thinking mind evolved to solve, they're gone.
So now we find, like, oh, it's, you know, 68 degrees, I'm freezing. And that becomes
a problem. Or it's 74 or 75 and I'm, you know, too hot. And so all these things they're
dealing with in society, these amazing complaints that were just like, where did that stuff
come from? So many things in office politics. I mean, so much of the conflict that's going
on right now, you could almost say, how much of the conflict going on is just people finding
problems? Because that seems to be what the mind does. And it does. And it does so even
when there isn't a problem to be solved.
So this mentality of oppressed versus the oppressor that Marxism kind of capitalized
on it, you know, by not creating it maybe, but by recognizing that this is something
that is deeply embedded within humanity. And now it's been incentivized that, you know,
now it's changing a little bit because I think people have begun seeing right through it.
But for a long time, it was incentivized that if you're a victim, you're the special one.
And so, for example, let's say within this context of critical race theory that we're
going to talk about, all it is, is that if you're white, you are taking advantage of
this privilege that has been given to you by other white people who, by the way, screwed
over everyone else for you as a white person to have this privilege. So if you're born
white, not only you cannot not be an oppressor, you can't also recognize that, yes, I could
have some privileges, but I don't really see races. I see just different people with...
No, no, no, no, no, you can't be doing that either. You have to be actively anti-racist.
And they define what is anti-racism, which includes, you know, you buying books, a bunch
of people who are getting paid like $20,000, $25,000 an hour just to give Zoom talks, just
so people feel like, yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, we're on the part of the oppressed.
So...
It's a beautiful Freudian trick. Freud did the same thing. He said, look, you know, you
hate your parents and it's unconscious. And one or two things happened. You know, you'd
either agree with them, say, you're right, I hate my parents, or you wouldn't. And then
he's still right because it's just unconscious. And there's no way the person can win. So
anything you do, it's like it philosophically puts you into a corner where you can't win.
So you either admit that you're the oppressor or by definition, you're like, you don't see
it as a problem.
Well, you don't see it that you're an oppressor, but you're still an oppressor. Yeah.
Yeah. And it's impossible. There's literally nothing. So there's... And again, maybe this
has been one of the hallmarks of history. We put people into certain categories based
on physical characteristics and we back them into these corners where there's really nothing
they can do, you know, except admit that this group is right. I mean, it ends up being their
only choice.
Yeah. But obviously it's bogus in the context of, for example, critical race theory, because
what it is is that it's a form of racism that justifies itself because it's fighting a different
kind of racism. But they're saying that this is actually not racism to be racist against
white people because white people have been in power for a very long time. So it's okay
if they get screwed over for the sake of other people. But you see that even that, they're
not staying true to that because for... Kanye West came out to support Trump. Everybody
came down at him that, oh, he's white supremacist. He's a wrong kind of black. There are plenty
of black people who are on the right, who are not going along with what's going on.
A very good example of what happened yesterday in Virginia that, you know, a bunch of people
on MSNBC and CNN were talking about, oh, this is a result of racism that people have voted
for this conservative for the Republican Party by margin of a lot, you know, because Biden
won Virginia by I think around 10 points. And this shift has been enormous. But they're
not even mentioning that Virginia also elected their first black female lieutenant governor.
And how is this going to be aligned with this idea that they're promoting that no, all the
white people are against all the black people and all the black people are basically the
oppressed who have absolutely no ability to do anything other than just being in this
line that we're drawing with the leadership of absolute minority of people, most of whom
are coming from academia, right? All this academic theory that they've forced upon people
as some kind of social experiments that they're saying, hey, just believe what we are saying.
This is a new form of religion. Just believe in the greater good, the good end, the utopia
that we are drawing. And, you know, everything, everything else basically justifies this end.
And there's a couple things going on there. I think cognitive science offers actually
some help in this area because we know confirmation bias is probably one of the biggest faults
of the way we think. You know, we set out to prove we're right. And, of course, that's
what Freud did. And if you're really good at proving you're right, that's when you're
clever enough to back people into a corner and they can't do anything. And so, again,
when you just think about, like, what do you type? What are you typing? What are you looking
at? And, of course, there's algorithms that if you're only looking to confirm what you
already know, then a computer is going to help you so much with that. All these search
engines are going to look, they're going to so support this because then you're just going
to find more and more evidence of exactly what you know. And, of course, if that's happening
with the media, that's a problem too. But we also have really smart people like Steven
Pinker goes around. I mean, he wrote that book Enlightenment Now to show that we really
have it amazingly good right now. But I also love one of his other lines that almost seemed
like it took me back to third grade, but we need a reminder of it. And he said, you cannot
make accurate judgments about the individual based on their group membership. And it's
like, well, yeah, I know that. But we all seem like we should know that. But somehow
we threw that philosophy, we threw that piece of advice, or I would say that piece of fact,
we just threw it out the window. And now we're back to saying, if I know your group membership,
I know something about you. But the problem is, we know from research and statistics,
I mean, no, you cannot make, I mean, that's the whole thing about when you look at the
normal curve, it shows that here's a bunch of average people. But, you know, half of
them will be on the right, nor they're on the other. This is the abstract way of describing
a group. And there's tons of variability within that group. And what we're finding out, I
think, one of the major lessons that we will eventually find out, although I think maybe
Jordan Peterson may have said this too, already, that what we're going to find out is that
there's far more variability within these groups than there are between them. And so
simply by categorizing people white and black, well, what if there's more variability within
each of those groups? Then it makes absolutely no sense to use the categorical division in
the first place. And we need to move on to something that, unfortunately, is more complex.
The thinking mind does not want to work. It's lazy. It loves cartoon-like versions of reality
that are just easy to assimilate. And so when we tell people things like, you know, well,
here's group A and group B, and they have these different characteristics. Oh, you know,
someone from group B? Well, then this is one thing you can conclude about them. I mean,
it's really a cartoon-like version of reality, but the mind buys into it because it loves
simple stories like that, simple narratives. And we become victims of, like, just falling
prey to really simple stories that the mind is very, I mean, that's the way it worked.
I mean, back, so the theory that I've been working on is, again, a story about our history
as a species and how is it that human beings came on the planet about two and a half million
years ago, and then all of a sudden we had all kinds of different, you know, Homo erectus,
Nandrothal, and we had all these different, maybe eight, although they probably end up
going to get to, like, 12. Who knows how many? They keep finding different versions when they
find artifacts.
Of humans.
And these are human beings. These are human beings. But we have slight differences. And
again, Homo sapiens, our version, popped up on the scene only 200,000 years ago, and we
were smaller, we were not physically dominant, but we had this gift, this kind of mental
trick, this kind of mind hack of categorizing. And it's not that other species couldn't
do this, but I think we just did it so effortlessly. It just came so easy. And one of the things
that I think we're going to realize is that categorization is absolutely an illusion.
It's the same, like, when people ask me, look, what do you mean by Maya? You know, this illusory
male that prevents us from seeing the real world. And the thing I would point to is categorization.
And categorization, again, well, what do we do with categorization? We take a bunch of
individual differences, tons of variability. That's the way nature is. It's all messy.
And then the mind will focus on one quality that all these very different things have
in common, ignores everything else, ignores all the differences, the vast differences
in all these individuals. And so we could say, like, that's ignorance. It's like ignorance.
You just have to completely ignore all that. But they say, well, they all have this one
thing in common. And again, whether it's skin color, gender, that's whatever, identity politics.
You're taking people who have one thing in common and you're grouping them and then believing
that it's possible to know that group. And you can't. I mean, there are a bunch of individuals
who vary all over the place. It's super. And what it is, these averages that we talk about
when we look at groups, they're statistical averages that are just, they exist in the
world of abstractions. They're not, you can't go out and see these groups. Like, you might
be saying, well, I can see an example of a white person. Well, can you really see whiteness?
Can you see, you know, the race? And you can't. You can't because it's something that we've
made up. And I think we're going to eventually start feeling that a little bit more deep.
And you can see that some of the political stuff we're dealing with here is an argument
between group identities. And I think identity politics is exactly that. It's simplifying
people based on very trivial characteristics and, you know, race and gender. The irony
of this is when you get into spiritual practices, like a lot of different forms of meditation,
you start the meditation off saying, I'm not my body. I mean, you're starting off like
with this acknowledgement, like my true self has nothing to do with this physical body.
And yet we seem to take some of these really trivial qualities and we categorize them and
then believe we can know something about a person based on that.
Yeah, but, you know, even the term we, when you say we, there is no such a thing as we.
No, there isn't. It's all useful, somewhat useful abstractions, but I think they are
getting us into trouble more than they should. You're right.
Yeah, we all use it. You know, again, see, I'm saying we all use it. I'm sure there's
some people who don't use it, but it also shows the limits of language and how limited
everything man-made is towards that objective reality. And I think this is a very important
difference to understand that yes, the conflict of humanity seemed to have been around this
dilemma of individuality and group, tribes basically. And for a longest time, it obviously
made sense for people to be in groups because there were other groups of people. And if
you were not in a group, you would be just decimated. You would be annihilated by that
group of people. But we became more secure in the case of our survival. You know, we
are not bound to go and find any kind of a food today because there might not be food
for the next five days, right? So we have the option to go to different grocery stores
to find different items up to our likings, which is customized. So let's say that shopper
be placed in a group. Yes, it can be placed in a group of shoppers, people who go out
and shop. But you cannot pin it down that there's a group of people who go, you know,
this percentage to like Publix, this percentage to Walgreens, this percentage to Walmart.
People have this freedom and autonomy to make different choices, right? But it seems like
because this structure called society is also manmade, this is not an objective reality.
We have assembled this construct and all the tools within it, including ethics and morality
to get from point A to point B. And that point B has always been determined based on the
need that we've had in order to survive. I don't think people have come together most
in most of history to build something necessarily. They've come together to build something against
something or someone else. There's always been a threat for people to come together
and build like a, you know, I would argue it's always been about tools. You just build
a more capable, more complex, more sophisticated tool, own the other group, and then the other
group, whatever remains of it, notice what you've done, improve upon that tool. And,
you know, we have evolved in the way that our tools have surpassed our level of comprehension.
And now we are, you know, we are really addressing the core of exactly what is it that when we
say we, what do we mean? What are the elements that we have in, you know, we share as a collective
of humanity? And I think this is that point, which is the point of philosophy, really.
Yeah, I think we talked about the beginning of that movie, 2001, A Space Odyssey, where,
you know, that moment, that first thought, and one of our ancestors like, well, this
is a bone, but I can use it as a weapon. So we started thinking in ways that we could
use things for what they're not. And then he throws that bone into space, and it becomes,
you know, a space shuttle or something. And you're like, wow, you know, it's the same,
the trick is like, it's the same thing that we're thinking 70,000 years ago, that's responsible
for all the technology that we have now. And it's all tool building. And it's, you know,
and it's not a linear scale. So we were building tools, and we, you know, if you look at some
I think was Homo erectus, you know, just never accelerated with tools. They really had the
same tools for like 2 million years. They, I mean, have really simple things to cut with
and they never had that kind of, I need a better mousetrap kind of thing. And then we
of course did. And so that's why you see this, you know, this nice line where it just keeps
going. But then all of a sudden, all the stuff we're making now, and if you look, like the
basic production, like when did human production, and of course, you've got like the Industrial
Revolution, but it's the curve just goes like this for the entire human. And then all of
a sudden, just like in the last 100 years, it goes up like this.
Yeah, because technology, technology advances exponentially. And at that line that seemed
flat, it was never flat. You're showing you're showing a link on your screen. Oh, something
came up. Interesting. Are you send me a link? Very interesting. I never see. I just showed
it now. Weird. Anyways, we're going to show some of Chris's articles about Chris's and
all that. But yeah, that that line that seemed flat, it was never flat. It's just the difference
between each generation was, you know, you go from one to two, two to four, four to eight,
eight to 16. So it's not really, you know, visible. But at some point, you go 30 steps
exponentially, you hit billion, you know, but our experience is linear. So yes, we have,
we have assumed that we're using all these tools, including radio and television and
newspapers and, you know, early internet and all that, in order to pursue our, you know,
what we assume to be shared goals, right? Because when you had limited sources of interpretation
and distribution of information, obviously, your objectives seem to be shared among the
public because the options were not presented. But now for people who are willing to see
because it's terrifying, but it's also exciting and exhilarating. Somebody said on this podcast,
that's the correct term to use for how we feel in this period, that, you know, the tools
have surpassed our evolution. And so all of our values are open, open to be questioned
and open to be debated and challenged. And exactly because of that, I think some people
are going back to very pure tribalism based on values and cultures and religions and whatever
that they can hold on to. You know, I made this argument, I think two years ago on this
podcast that I think fundamentalist version of religions are going to make a comeback
because when everything seems so uncertain, you want to hold on to whatever that you can
find that give you sense, illusion of certainty and solidity. And then there are a group of
people who just want to stop all these technological advancement or like we have to put a moratorium
on it and we don't need this level of advancement. And, you know, the only thing I can tell those
people is that good luck with that, because our evolution has never been separated from
the evolution of tools and technology.
Yeah, I mean, it's interesting that, you know, if you take someone that just right now and
you take them into a lab and you get them to start making primitive tools, it's interesting
that the left side of the brain starts like acting up, even though they're using, you
know, they may can use their left hand so that would activate normally you think the
right side. But any kind of tool making, it just is such a primitive thing. And there's
just programs in there that are set for making these really simple things. And of course,
that's the same thing that goes into making computers. I mean, we're tapping into the
same element of desire, you know, and it's almost like that Buddhist thing, like, you
know, desire is the cause of suffering because, you know, it's our desire for whatever the
next best thing is that used to be and you're right, it was not flat, but it's nowhere near
the curve that we're dealing with now. And so things become, you know, kind of an existential,
you know, every phone goes by too quick and you can probably upgrade your phone every
year and maybe every six months and computers are, you know, just moving along just way
too quickly for everybody. So we've got this, again, 70,000 year old program that's living
at a pace that it was never intended to. So I think you're right. People go back to fundamentalism
because the core of fundamentalism, however it appears, is the absolute certitude in it.
And that simplifies everything. It just makes everything else just seem, you know, it's
a set of rules. It's like a bureaucracy that if you follow all these rules, you have guaranteed
outcomes. And so I would have to agree with you. I think that that dogma and we know what
is dogma but the inability to, you know, shutting down a question before it even comes up. And
that's what we see so often. It's a frightening thing when you get into academia and the cancel
culture and you see people, you know, stopping a debate before it even happens. And I would
suggest to anyone listening, really get into James Lindsay on this. He's done an outstanding
job of breaking down where all this came from, the history of it, and just reading simple
books to you like Mercuse, where he was able to start off and did it so clearly that says
that, look, you know, if you're on the left, absolutely everything is tolerated. Violence,
spelled out, but anything from the right has to be stopped before it even is thought. So
you stop it for you. You don't wait till someone talks and then censor it. You have to stop
it before they even have that thought.
Oh, you can't even if you're if you're coming from the left, you're not even allowed to
share a platform that is given to somebody who you would recognize or categorize as right
wing. So, you know, earlier on, I had some guests on this podcast is like five years,
six years ago, who would associate with the left. These are like prominent leftists now.
And they had problems with some of the guests that I had later on. Like you have to remove
our episodes. I'm like, there's no way I'm going to do that. You know, it really is a
nonsensical problem that you do. I didn't give you any guarantee that I'm going to ask
you who I'm going to talk to. But they're like, you know, you're giving them you're giving
this argument that is toxic to our cause, air, basically, you're giving it oxygen, and
we're against that. Totally totalitarian.
But yeah, and if you say, well, one group gets to do whatever pre rain total, and the
other group gets to be shut down, then that's interesting. Then you say, Okay, well, how
do you know someone's on the right? Because one of the fascinating things that happens
to me as a university professor is, like, you know, I wouldn't categorize myself as
being on the left or the right, I would say I'm a complex person, my views, I don't even
buy much into the solid reality of a self to begin with. So, you know, I would say it's
a fluid thing with different thoughts. And but, but I, my perception is that I'm very
far on the right. And so when I go into the university, it's, you know, it's just assumed.
And it's interesting, too, because I get labeled being on the right, specifically because I'm
such an advocate for viewpoint diversity, and wanting to get discussions going. And
I want people to talk and debate. And I went, and I often, you know, quote, john Stuart
Mill and say, Look, you don't even know your own argument, unless you know the other side
of it. And that gets me all of a sudden, I got this giant conservative label on me. Right.
And so it's freaking me out. Because I'm like, so that's concerned, like, like, it's not
even I'm like, that's conservative now. Well, I'll tell you this. The African American Museum
of actually me, the National Museum of African American History and Culture, they came out
with something. Those of our viewers and listeners who watch this on YouTube, I'm showing these
screenshots, they came out with whiteness and white culture. This is like a year and
a half ago, I think around the George Floyd whole thing, that they point out some of the
characteristic and signs and elements of this white culture and whiteness.
Rugged individualism, emphasis on scientific method, which is in which includes objective,
rational, linear thinking, cause and effect relationship, quantitative emphasis. But it
also goes to all the way to justice based on English common law, that is whiteness,
therefore it's bad. Competition being number one, win at all costs, win or lose their diatomy,
action orientation, master and control nature, decision making, majority rules. So obviously,
there was a huge backlash against these people and they removed it from their website. Yet,
if you go to their website right now, they have the talking about race section, they
have a whiteness section, and they go all the way down, explain again and stuff. And
then the video at the end of persons talking about it is this vile racist woman, Robin
D'Angelo, the author of White Fragility, that it's not even like hidden or subtle.
It's that this is how it is, we are being racist against white people and that is acceptable
because white people have been empowered. And I echo what you said about James Lindsay.
Lindsay was a guest here almost a year and a half ago on this podcast and it was really
interesting because when we did the episode, few days after that, George Floyd stuff happened
and he was like, I'm just going to release this a little later. I was like, yeah, totally.
But I also had an interesting experience. I went to see the first manned launch of a
SpaceX rocket. He was a test test dragon with the very first astronauts they sent to International
Space Station. And it was the same day that they were burning down number of communities
all around the US. I think it was May 31, 2020. And I was thinking how America has a
choice, such a clear choice, that you have a building culture. I went to see the launch
and all that. It was like three hours drive from here. You have the building culture of
building a rocket, a reusable rocket that sent astronauts to the space station and then
come back. It's just incredible achievement. And on the other hand, you have this cancel
culture which is a destructive culture of basically we just want to remove everything
that exists as a result of this white culture or white supremacy or whatever. And we don't
know what we're going to replace it with. But we do need that a good thing to do is
to removing all of them. And people shouldn't put up with it for any amount of ethical and
moral argument because it is immoral and unethical to begin with that we're going to ruin the
lives of a whole bunch of people because of the color of their skin because we have this
abstract ideal utopia that we might or might not get to it. But so no, there is no ethical
or moral argument whatsoever.
And people have to be really careful because I'm sure you're familiar with the Jane Elliott
experiments when she took these third graders and just said, well, people with brown eyes
are smarter than people with blue eyes. And they all just sucked right up into it. I mean,
they just bought into it and they were treating people horribly. And then she just went in
the next day and reversed it and said, no, it's actually whatever other eye colors. And
she switched it on them and they just followed right along. I mean, so kid, that's that old
program. It's so susceptible to if we hear this category and then we say, well, this
category equals bad, we have to actually become extremely conscious of how susceptible we
are to that for us to actually ever be able to overcome it.
Sorry, I think I lost you for a second.
Yeah, I'm here. I hear you. Yeah.
And I remember my daughter, she came home from school maybe and maybe it was around
third grade and she was all confused and she looked and she goes, dad, am I white? You
know, like it was never like, like an obvious kind of thing to her. And so I like held up
something like typing paper next to her skin. I'm like, do you look white? What do you think?
And she just kind of looked at me, she goes, well, I'm, you know, and I was like, a white
person would be kind of terrifying, right? I mean, it's like if they were like actual
the definition of white. And so it just shows you these are cartoon characters, characters
that we're dealing with. It's so absolutely obvious that they are things that are only
existing in our head. I mean, think about race. I mean, where is it when no one's thinking
about it? And where is it? Like there's so many places you can go. One of the reasons
I, in fact, I was just down close to you, I think in St. Petersburg a couple of months
ago and you can go to beaches and all this. And one of the reasons I love it is because
you see such variation in skin color and just no one doesn't. I mean, it's not recognized.
We're like, we're all just human beings hanging out at the beach. And so, but then you watch
their news channels and it looks like there's this, you know, it's like it's a war going
on. And so, so much of that is covered by the media. And then the susceptibility of
the mind to just fall prey to these simple categories. I mean, and we have to be very
careful what we expose kids to, too, because I think Jane Elliott, it was such a good,
you know, none of that would have been ethical these days to do something like that to these
kids but it just showed so explicitly our susceptibility to thinking in simplistic categories
and then doing really nasty stuff to people if they're in the out group. And you'd think
we would have learned that lesson. And so, anytime you refer to any category, well, you
know, whiteness or white anything or any, again, like I said, with Steven Pinker, you
cannot make reliable judgments about an individual based on their group membership. And if we
just got that to sink in a little and get people to work and realize that, wow, there
really is a lot of variability within these groups and that may be all it would take to
start breaking it down. But you're talking about an old program that's been successful
for like 70,000 years. You know, when you look at the 20th century, it was like the
bloodiest century in human history because it was able to activate this old program and
get us thinking in ways of groups, in group and out group. And, you know, you mix that
old program with technology and it becomes extremely dangerous. And so, everyone's sort
of waiting to see what's going to happen. I don't know if you heard about this thing,
maybe it was James Lindsay was talking about the, you know, the white pill or the black
pill. Right. Yeah. And so, you know, everyone's sort of like, it's such a complex system.
It's very hard to predict very complex systems like this. So we're all sort of just waiting.
And while some of us are optimistic and think maybe we'll have these insights that, you
know, races itself as a construction and the way we're defining it and we'll have these
insights that every time we solve a problem, we just find another problem because that's
what the mind will do endlessly. And then we shift, like I said, in your example, we've
got two worlds. One is a world where we complain and we're a victim and we're miserable. And
the other reality is we're incredibly grateful for this amazing adventure of being a conscious
being on a planet at a time that's unprecedented in all kinds of really cool stuff that we
could be incredibly grateful for. And all of a sudden, we get really happy and we feel
satisfied. And so those two worlds, as you described them, I mean, it is a choice that
we make. And some people have just such a habit. You know, that's the thing about humans
too, we're real susceptible to habits. So we complain, we feel miserable, but we're used
to it. And so it takes a lot of conscious effort, like breaking any habit. You know,
some people do, they put the cigarettes down, they never smoke again. But for other people,
they struggle with it. And as I talk about my mindfulness class, you know, sometimes
we're so unhappy that we feel so comfortable being unhappy that we're actually in a weird
way happy when we're unhappy. And then we get this, you know, feelings of enlightenment,
like you might think in a technical sense, but we feel like, you know, kind of wonderful.
We feel a little bit of joy because we start feeling grateful. But then we feel uncomfortable
with feeling grateful. Because now, all of a sudden, you know, we feel like, oh, this
is my privilege, you know, because privilege became a bad thing. It used to be something
that you were grateful for and pondered on. And it was the origins of a lot of positive
feelings. Now, all of a sudden, if I have a certain amount of things and I live in a
certain time, then all of a sudden, well, you know, things that I didn't even choose,
that I still should be so grateful for, but I didn't choose any of it. And then suddenly
you kind of feel like, well, maybe I shouldn't feel so good about all this. So, but I do
really think, you know, the crossroads, you know, taking the, you know, the white pill,
black pill, feeling some optimism, we really don't know where this is going to go. And
of course, as someone who's got, you know, one lawsuit that took place from 2014 to 2017
and then a second lawsuit that I'm currently in, so I'm kind of living it right at the
front lines, you might say, at a university where you could say, okay, you know, what's
Neibart doing that's so radical? Why is he this radical conservative? I mean, he writes
books on spirituality, he writes books on, you know, neuroscience and Buddhism, he's
trying to transcend this idea of a self and get people to feel a little bit more grateful.
Okay, well, that, you know, what's so like, like radically concerned? Am I so far in the
right now? And so it's very confusing for me to like, because I think things have shifted
so far that, well, I actually call this the Borg theory of conformity. And I know a lot
of people aren't familiar with the Borg, I'm a huge Star Trek fan, so I was, and I have
to explain this to my students because they're like, they have no clue because it was 90s,
you know. But the Borg was this machine, it was half machine, half humans, and it was
– they flew around in space in the cube, which I thought was interesting because, you
know, nature is filled with wiggles and yet the mind always tries to square off things
and create edges and stuff and flatten out the messiness of nature. So they represented
technology in its kind of most advanced form because they were able to, you know, connect
the organic to the computers.
But the most amazing thing that they predicted in the 90s is that the Borg flew around space
and had one mission, destroy individuality. I mean, that was the mission of the Borg.
They would just take up species and they would steal their technology and – but the most
important thing they would steal is their uniqueness as an individual and anything that
was different, anything that – it's always like this, you know, species that was – they
would even say, you know, resistance is futile. You know, you're going to basically join
us in becoming this one collective mindset. So it really, to me, if you haven't seen
it before, you know, I would suggest to people like just watch a couple of things, you know,
very short YouTube clips. Just type in Borg and Star Trek and you'll see how – I think
it was almost prophetic insight into where we were going in terms of this kind of mass
group, this mindset that would just kind of steamroll over things and be like, you know,
if we even have a hint that you're not conforming, then you're gone. And so – and then of
course, that was in some ways a really short version of the last century. And then of course,
it resulted in what – I mean, some estimates are up to 100 million deaths, you know. It's
– I think we have to be pretty careful to see, you know, how we're going to deal with
this for this century.
Yeah, which can potentially be far worse, you know, because, yeah, we haven't learned
anything and history rhymes because basically human nature persists. That's the reason
of it. But the difference right now is that we also have the technological tool to make
that Borg structure or hive mind reality into an actual reality, you know, first through
media and social media and eventually through genetic engineering. And, you know, we are
at the very, very vital and extremely important point in history that, you know, we – I
do believe that we either go into evolve into a post-human species or we just end up annihilating
ourselves basically. This is not a place we can stay much longer. I want to talk more
about this, but I think we laid the ground for about 45 minutes for you to talk a little
in depth about the cases that you're dealing with, your lawsuits. You mentioned that you
sent me links to some articles from 2014, Neibar versus Slippery Rock University. And
there's another one. This is from the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, psychology professor as Slippery
Rock University claims gender discrimination.
All right, Chris, let's get to where these problems are coming from. You mentioned that
they started in 2014. You're involved in the second lawsuit. And let's hear whatever
there is to hear about it and how it all begun. How is it going and where do you think it's
headed?
Well, again, I transitioned from the old world to the new world. And again, that happened
sometime around 2014. But I started off my career late 90s and academia was really a
place that was pretty minimum in politics. You could walk around and you could actually
say who you voted for and people might joke about it. Maybe someone came across as being
on the right. And if you look at the numbers back then, it was always in balance, but it
was something like two liberals for every one conservative. And so the numbers, they
were always in balance, but there was enough of diversity there that it wasn't really a
hive mind. And then it wasn't really something coherent, something that, like you said, it
all became more real when with the internet and with that kind of instantaneous communication
that we have now that hive mind has become much more externalized and almost a reality
to it. So I was in a department that did have a male chairperson. He died from cancer and
then that's kind of when everything changed. So he was out of the scene and it just, that's
when I remember everything just sort of turned. It seemed to me that the main mission was get
him out.
This is why you-
Well, this was about 2014. It was maybe earlier than that, 2012 to 2013, because I found myself
being removed from every committee. I was getting really horrible reviews. I was getting
complaints because certain things I would do at meetings, like supposedly I slammed
my fist down on a desk one time at a meeting. I'm like, I don't think I've ever slammed
my fist down ever on anything. So all these complaints started coming up and like I said,
I was just so excluded. The message was so clear. But I was trying to figure out like
what did I do? And it's true that I did speak up a few times and I did have a different
opinion but at the time I thought, well, different opinions are just that. They don't mean hate.
They don't mean, they're just different opinions. And so there was a time when they wanted to
hire and a lot of these problems started when they were doing new hires. So they wanted
to hire someone and I found a really qualified male applicant and I was an advocate for him
and they went with a far less qualified. And it wasn't just a little far less. It was like
order of magnitude less than this other individual. And I really fought for the guy, not because
he's a guy. I just thought because he was better at the job. He had more experience,
far more experience. And then the person that they hired had no formal experience but tons
of political activism. And that's when I started kind of picking up on this, this transformation
where departments went from being ordinary places of discourse to the hive mind starting
to form. And the politics were more important than the scholarship. And that was a really,
I don't think I really caught on to that until maybe I was in the middle of the lawsuit or
it started to hit me of, okay, you know, this is what's happening. And it's not just my
university, it's actually happening in a lot of, that's when I started hearing stories
from other places. So the university now, again, it's an all-female, all-white department
in psychology in terms of full-time faculty. And the remarkable thing about this is that
we've also just brought in a new position, the infamous diversity, inclusion, and equity
department. So we now have a department that does that. And to me, I'm like, well, okay,
that sounds noble, you know, diversity and all of them except the equity thing seems
to be a little bit more difficult to understand exactly.
It's diversity, equity, and inclusion. It should be diversity, inclusion, and equity
because then it would write as D.I. Now it's D.E.I. D.I. is way closer to what is going
on with this concept than the other thing. Please continue, sorry.
I had the same insight, I thought, because I kept putting the letters together. Well,
actually if you switch these around a little bit, it's actually D.I. which is pretty much
what it felt like they wanted me to do. But it really got a little intense in terms of,
in fact, it even got so bad that, so I had filed the federal lawsuit and then I was kicked
out of the department. And that was really remarkable to think that like I could get
kicked out of the department. I thought the lawsuit would keep you, they would watch themselves
for retaliation. They wouldn't want to do something so overt as to retaliate. So they
kicked me out and then it took a lot of work to get my lawyer and reminding them what they
just did. And then they sort of took it back and said, well, we didn't really do that.
But then it was about 2017 and we were doing a lot of settlement talks. And I don't think
I still, you know, it's been such a slow process for me to really put together what's going
on that I still, and maybe I trivialized it because it was just too overwhelming. You
know, particularly in 2017, I was the only voice that I knew of that was dealing with
this. I felt really isolated, really alone, zero support. And most of the stuff I got
was like, look, you know, you started seeing these hints like, well, you're just a privileged
white male. So, you know, don't cry about it when some of your privileges get taken
away. And so it was that sins of the father mentality that was like, I have to pay the
bill because supposedly my people who had the same skin color and gender as me did this
horrible stuff according to you, but I'm left paying the bill. And that mentality seemed
absolutely unethical. And it seemed very primitive. It seemed like the way we would have, again,
maybe thought, you know, thousands of years ago. And so it was just, you know, it was
shocking that this was happening, that it could be so absolutely simplistic. But every
time I would say, well, let me challenge this a little bit. Let me see if maybe that's really
on track. Every time I would challenge it, I guess kept finding more and more evidence
to support this. Like, okay, well, you know, and I've still asked my, I've asked my university
several times, well, what did I do? You know, just tell me. Because I've literally been
guilty of this for so many years now of something worthy of being kicked out of departments
because I've been kicked out of two now. But anyway, to get back to the settlement, it
was a little overwhelming at the time. And they offered me a pretty good deal. They said,
we'll let you go off and you can do your own department in cognitive science. You can kind
of do whatever you want to do. And to be honest, that felt very enticing. I was very excited
about that. So I said, okay, you know, we'll do this. So I was in another department and
I got to develop a cognitive science concentration. So it's not like a major or anything. It's
just like this, you know, kind of small little thing that some people might be interested
in. And I felt pretty comfortable with it. And I developed six new courses and everything
was going really well. In fact, I had students filling up the classes. They really liked
it because I offered classes on consciousness and left right brain and artificial intelligence
and things the university hadn't even thought of offering before. And so the classes were
filling up. Everything's going okay. Okay, so round two. And so I'm going to tell you
this story and I'm going to tell you it like as I absolutely remember it. And it's one
of these, it's such a powerful story, I think, because it gets at exactly what's wrong with
the universities now. So we had, so I was in this department, it's called Interdisciplinary
Programs and it was a good place for me to be because they were all social scientists,
anthropology, sociology. And so it was a place for me to do something that was eclectic like
cognitive science. And so I walk into our spring meeting and I was about 45 minutes
late because my daughter had a medical, she had an impacted wisdom tooth so I had to run
her up and get her fixed before the meeting. So anyway, I run in, I'm just 45, the meeting
lasts all day. So 45 minutes late isn't, it's like a morning to late afternoon, four o'clock
or something meeting. So I didn't think that's such a big deal. And I walk into the room.
I remember we're a social science department, you know, Department of Interdisciplinary
Programs. So the whole thing is based around social science. I walk in and there's a huge
thing on the board and it says the Department of Cultural Studies and Diversity, big, you
know, Department of Culture. I'm like, okay, that's a little strange. Mission statement,
diversity, inclusion, equity. I'm like, okay, well, that's weird too because where did that
come from? I was soon told that they had, in my absence, redefined themselves, which
they're not allowed to do, as a department. They redefined themselves as a new department.
They're no longer a social science department. They are now a department of cultural diversity,
cultural studies and diversity. Okay. And their mission statement isn't social science
any longer. The mission statement is the inclusion, diversity and equity. And I was a little confused
and I thought, well, this is really strange. And they said, well, where does cognitive
science fit in this? And it didn't take me too long to figure. I'm like, it doesn't fit
in at all.
It doesn't, yeah.
Cognitive science is a scientific discipline. It has nothing to do with political activism.
And they said, well, you need to leave. You're no longer part of the department. And at the
time the dean was present and that was it. It was like, you're gone. And so the irony
of that is we're at a time where we get these new departments of diversity, inclusion and
equity. And of course, the first thing I did when I went back to my office is I wrote the
president of the university. I wrote the provost. I wrote HR. I wrote the diversity office.
I just sat and wrote a letter explaining what just happened to me. That's not even
permissible within our own guidelines. We're not allowed to just make up a new program
out of any. It's like imagine going into biology one day and they don't like some biologists
because they think that they're on this political side.
I'll give you a better example that is more sensible for everybody. This is exactly what
happened in Seattle when a bunch of these people went and they created autonomous zone.
And they said, this is our territory now. It's not Seattle. It's not even the U.S.
This is a territory that is just, we were just built a tier and there are people still
living there. There are still shops. And when they ask the mayor of Seattle, hey, what is
up with what's going on with all these people? She said, we're probably going to have a summer
of love. That was her explanation. Also coming from the same political ideology and political
perspective. So it's, it sounds like exact same thing happened in the academic set up.
It was just a smaller scale of the exact same thing. Because as I wrote all of these, again,
I got a bunch of mixed responses. Sometimes they said, well, you know, that's just the
tough luck of your life. Just live with it. And then they said other things like, well,
you know, they never really did. They are just complete denial. Like, no, they never
did that. And it went back and forth. But the interesting thing is they never investigated
it. They never, they were never like, you know, they did this thing that was so, it
would be so against their philosophy. If you ask someone and put it in different terms,
you know, say something like, you know, you've got a, you know, an all, a mostly male department
and there's one female or you could play the race issue with it. And then everyone just
got together and just kicked this person out. You know, it would have been, now that would
have been absolutely unacceptable. And heads would have rolled. I mean, everything would
have, but because I have a certain status as, you know, color, my skin, I mean, my gender,
for some reason, this stuff comes together and it's kind of like, well, it's just him.
And that's that sins of the father again. Like you're paying for this stuff. You had
nothing to do with it. And they have, they didn't do a single thing. They didn't investigate
it. I was even told by the head of HR, she just, I was explaining the set of meeting
to her and she just said, look, I don't care what happened in the past. You know, the only
thing I'm concerned about is what's happening right now. And the problem with that is again,
obviously there's just something special about my unique setup that's, that seems to give,
you know, the red light to these kinds of behaviors. And one of the things I think we
need to really work on is some, I'm not a very consistent human being, but I really
like, you know, and yes, these are all social, maybe they're all social constructs, countries
are social constructs. But if we're really going to work together as a civilization with
some kind of coherency, we have to have some kind of consistency. We can't just let some
groups absolutely redefine reality and completely get away with it. And then other groups be
powerless. I mean, that's the exact oppression that they're talking about. They're saying
we get to construct reality, your version of reality isn't valid. And I mean, it was
a, it was a pretty intense experience. And then they just threw me into a department
of one. So I went from, you know, being in an actual department with, you know, I think
it was eight or nine people. And suddenly I'm like, on this little island of misfit
toys, like, but I'm all alone. That's like, well, we'll put you off in your own department.
And so it's really, you know, punishment after punishment, department, department of white
supremacy.
You know, I really think again, well, one of the problems I had too is that I was, there's
a guy from the military, he's a retired lieutenant colonel. And, and we got along pretty well
because we both thought so much about teaching students how to think for themselves rather
than what to think. And we just really thought that was important. And we kind of clicked
and he was very good. He was an excellent teacher. He had this ability to go in and
really shake up people's reality systems, which I think is part of what education is
about, you know, shake things up a little bit, get you thinking and get you to understand
how the mind works. So you can, you know, that's like here, here's our gift. We'll
teach you how the mind works. Then you can think about whatever you want and believe
whatever you want, but we're not here to tell you what to believe and what to think.
And so we connected up and he was in that department with me, that interdisciplinary
programs department. He was the leadership person, which fit in also nicely with all
this. And they got rid of him very quickly. I mean, he, he was on the chopping block way
before I was. And so they had kicked him out first. And then they, depending on how you
want to read it, they either fired him, they gave him to classes started in three days.
He didn't get a contract until three days before classes started. And so he had, you
know, by their own account, they would, it should have been out months before by their
own rules. But anyway, the short version is, you know, it could have maybe some, my association
with him. So that's the thing. Like if we're going to, if we're going to really improve
society, me and you can talk. Now, if you go talk to some other person that I don't
really care for, that shouldn't really affect our relationship. Like, why do I care who
you talk? Like, why can't we have a multiplicity and, and understand like, look, there's a
lot of selves in us and, and, and, and there's a lot of different sides to our personality
and it's a complex picture. Why does it have to be set up? Like, well, if you are friends
with this person, then I can't be friends with you. And to me, I think we're seeing
that break a little bit. I'm sure you've seen those conversations between like Ben Shapiro
and Russell Brand and people who disagree with each other, but still we're learning
to talk again. And we're learning that even if I disagree with you, that doesn't mean
I hate you. It just means I disagree with you. And so I do see some hope. That's why
I was saying I'm much more of a white pill person. I, in spite of all the stuff that's
happened to me and spending 10 years in court and on my second lawsuit and, and it's not,
you know, who knows how it's really going right now. But, but I feel extremely confident
that, you know, that this will turn in my favor because you can't just do this. You
can't, I mean, the school has no policy that says that they could have done this. It violated
the lawsuit settlement that said, look, we're going to put you here. But they had no power
to just kick me out that one day. So that's, that's really a huge percent of what the lawsuit
is about. Because if we really want to improve, it's very difficult to create a bureaucracy
around treating other people nice. You know, it's very difficult to say, well, you know,
like, you know, because some freedom is just having that ability to be a jerk some days.
And so, but, but you can see us, we're really trying to do that. We're trying to like in
court, I think political incorrectness, like political correctness movement, that is kind
of the beginning of this bureaucracy around how we treat other people. Now, the thing
is, the irony of all that is, is it's really not such a bad thing to treat other people
in a decent way. But I don't think we can create it into a bureaucracy. We can't have
rules. You must be nice to this person. And if we are, and I guess the reason I'm saying
that is because, do you ever hear the wonderful saying from the East, and Alan Watts used
to always say it, he said, when the wrong person uses the right means, the right means
work in the wrong way. And so what's happening here is, it's a noble, maybe virtuous idea.
But in the wrong hands, what ends up happening is, we create a whole set of like niceties
for some people, but then other people can, you know, burn at the stake and like, we're
okay with that. And so, you know, but I, you know, I'm optimistic. I haven't yet heard
one person, Jonathan Haidt, Jordan Peterson, and even James Lindsay, I haven't listened
to everything that he has done, but I haven't really heard the smoking gun of, okay, well,
here's how we fix it. Have you come across anyone with like...
You know, it's, it's a matter of what that it is, you know, what are we fixing? Because
I think this is a, yes, it's revealing what some people think, because this is not like
bunch of people at the top of the hierarchy of bureaucracy, who are pushing this forward.
They're also supported by tens of millions of people who, you know, they're the same
people who would vote for further restrictions, for vaccine mandates, vaccine passports, just
basically some kind of a, you know, supreme authority. Because most of these people are
atheists, they have replaced that supreme authority with government. And government
now has merged with corporate monopolies, big tech monopolies, more obvious than others.
So the fix from my perspective, because I see the solution as access and choice. And
I see the trend of technological evolution towards more access and more choice. This
obviously is disrupting some of our own structures, including the society, including institutions.
But then we have to make the choice between whether or not these structures that we have
built and they've worked for as long as they have, are we really insistent on keeping these
structures intact, even though they've been rotted to the core? Or we just move on to
whatever comes next, and we're building the alternative at the same time. So the solution
is building, because the problem is cancelling. And it's being driven from centralized points
of authority, centralized structures of authority, which have emerged in the form of monopolies.
You know, government is a monopoly, academia is a monopoly. So even the right questions
are not being asked, because the questions need to be asked that pursue the aim and the
objective of people who are running these monopolies. If you're running a university
and somebody comes and say, hey, I want to talk about race and intelligence, you're not
going to do that, because people who are supporting you and funding you are not okay with that.
But that is probably one of the most important topics that we do need to talk about, because
it's affecting everything else, especially now that we're building artificial intelligence.
You know what I'm saying? So the solution is not a utopian solution. The solution is
allowing individuals to experience themselves in a de-central kind of a manner, which is
the equivalent of being able to go to different shopping stores and buy whatever you want,
and then form tribes in a voluntary kind of a way. That, you know, we see the evidence
of that online and in virtual kind of environments far more than this world, because access and
choice is limited in this world by design. But digitally, you know, like World of Warcraft,
that was a society of people who came together around this video game, you know, they all
coming from different backgrounds. None of that mattered. You came together to achieve
certain kind of objective within that game. And then you went on and joined your other
tribes, who could be, you know, your classmates or family. So you didn't have one specific
kind of a tribe. You had different tribes for different objectives. And so I think this
is where we are headed. I'm also judging based on developments that are happening technologically.
You know, we're moving from web two, which is what we have now to web three, which is
serverless decentralized. Nobody owns the data. Everybody who is in the network own
the network, but nobody really owns it. It's decentralized. And they're serverless. So
you don't have like Twitter, they were like, Oh, you're talking in the way that we don't
like you to talk about, we just kind of silence you, we're going to remove you. But at the
same time, there are a lot of push. I don't know if you saw a so called whistleblower
emerge from Facebook saying that Facebook allowing people to say whatever they want
for profit. And the solution that she provided is for government to have more basically supervision.
To more control over the big tech that everybody calling nonsense on that. And she's an instrument
of furthering this monopoly, basically merging it with the government. So I think that's
where we are that people have more access and more choices because of our tools that
have advanced in a way that you know, the president of United States probably wouldn't
even have access to this level of technology 20 years ago. And people who are invested
in those monopolies and in those centralized, or centrally determined objectives, they're
throwing everything they can at it because they're losing control.
Hmm. Yeah, actually, if I had some input with that, it's actually it's similar in some ways.
Because one of the ways I see out of this is is just practicing really deeply into spirituality
because the whole trip of most spiritual traditions is that particularly in the East is that you're
just not this body. And so it's that recognition like race is really trivial, my gender is
really trivial. And yet we've escalated these to such self defining qualities that, you
know, there's this whole thing where kids try to figure out what their gender is. And
yet at the same time, the spiritual movement is saying, your gender is really not who you
are. So really, why is why even think about it? It's not who you are.
I think, actually, if I may say this, because we obviously been talking about this for a
while, just you and me, and we've been thinking about this much, much longer. And I think
now because there is a equivalent in the digital world of everything that is happening here,
it's very important to make this distinction that yes, you're not your body, but at the
same time, you need your body to survive in this structure that is a society that is built
by humans who are not necessarily smarter than you are. So I think more than focusing
on the spiritual side, it's more profound to recognize the difference between who you
are in this body and in this form and who you really are objectively. Right? And when
you see that difference, then your race and your culture wouldn't make that much of a
difference compared to your avatar that you use in some video games. For example, this
is how how you want to represent yourself in the digital world. This is how you represented
because of the game of evolution in this world. Yet none of it is objectively real. These
are constructs. Objectively, what is real, that's for you to figure out on your own.
There can't be any kind of an objective directive for that either. So it becomes a game.
Yeah, the body, you're stuck with it. And so, you know, it's not this kind of thing
like just, you know, stop working out or anything. But the idea is that it's just not central
to your identity. And then it's that neti neti movement where you're just not this,
not that. So you say, well, I'm not really my age. I'm not really my gender. I'm not
really this name. I'm not really... And then you strip all that away and then you get back
down to this real mystery that's impossible to put into words. But it's far more who you
are. And in that way, so again, and it sounds contradictory in some ways, but you move away
from this. It's actually what Jung called the quest of the hero. The quest of the hero
was to be embedded in this massive collective and to venture out individually and explore
your own path. I love that one place in the, it was the legends of King Arthur where the
Knights of the Round Table, when they entered the dark forest, they had to enter at their
own place. They couldn't go where there was a path. And so that's the thing. It's like
we're all having this adventure of figuring out our own identity. And it seems like it's
moving from the collective identity that culture tells us and they just tell us this. And well,
here's who you are to the adventure of stripping all that away and seeing what's left. And
in some cases, you have these transcendent experiences. And this is where these, you
know, like Nisargadatta or, you know, Ramana Maharshi and these like really classic spiritual
teachers, I mean, they were so, their whole practice centered around removing illusion
and getting at what is true. And there's just certain things that, you know, culture, it's
so pervasive, conformity is so pervasive. We don't even realize how often we think,
well, I'm thinking for myself. But you don't realize that your thoughts aren't even your
own either. You didn't invent a language. You didn't invent half the things that you're
thinking about. Would you still think of the same thing if you were born a thousand years
ago on the other end of the globe? And what we need to get to the original, okay, what's
the common, you know, what am I beyond all these illusory social roles? And then you
come to some very peaceful places and it's very hard to be combative when you get into
that state. But that's, you know, maybe just a small part of it. I think like anything,
it's a complex problem. It's not gonna be one easy, there's never one, you know, switch
to flick when it comes to complex problems. It's gonna be, you know, all kinds of things
that have to come together. But, you know, the Stoics had a great saying, you know, the
obstacle is the way. And so what I do is I look at all these obstacles and I say, well,
you know, this is the way. And so much of what I've dealt with has given me deeper insights
on how to deal with this stuff, you know, deeper, more interesting tricks on how to
deal with, you know, being kicked out over and over and dealing with bureaucracy. And
you see this, it's a funny thing where cancel culture backfires. They get rid of these people
and then they end up becoming famous. They're doing podcasts now, they're doing book deals.
And so, you know, or even like what happened with Dave Chappelle, you know, they say, well,
you know, we're gonna cancel and then it really doesn't seem to work. There's something about
that path of individuation. Again, so I think our species, you know, we had to have most
of us be conformist, but we also needed some percentage of us that were individuals. I
mean, how do you grow? How do you come up with something new unless someone breaks the
mold? And so I think we've got these people on the hero's journey and they're out there
being individuals, they're resisting the board mentality. And the funny thing about them
is, you know, the collective thinks that they've destroyed them, but they've empowered them.
And suddenly, they're having book deals and they don't even have like real jobs anymore.
They just, you know, real in a sense like, you know, nine to five kind of thing. They're
just enjoying what they're doing, going on podcasts and, you know, creating discussions
about what happened to them. I mean, would Jordan Peterson really be where he's at if
the whole pronoun debate didn't kind of launch him in the fame? I mean, on the one hand,
I mean, he's a smart guy, but, you know, he got thrown into the limelight because of a
particular debate that wanted to cast him out, but they never were able to do it. They
made him more powerful than he could have ever been as an ordinary university professor
if that debate had never taken place.
Yeah, Jordan Peterson is a perfect example, obviously, for him standing up in academia,
but also they cut his budget. I was in Toronto at a time when all of this was happening and,
you know, leftists were out of control back then in Canada. I think now they've pretty
much taken over all the institutions in that country in kind of a very non-competitive
kind of way, but when they cut Jordan Peterson's budget, they crowdsourced and they raised
like, I think something like 10 times the amount that he would have gotten. So that
was like a flicker and I think it was like 2017, something like that, that, hey, you
don't really need institutions, this whole connectivity globally, because it would be
very silly to say that only Canadians are learning from Jordan Peterson or only, you
know, English-speaking people are learning from, for example, Jordan Peterson. There
are people all around the world and you've got like a couple million people each chipping
like two dollars, you know, all of a sudden he's making tens of millions of dollars, which
as you said, made him more powerful.
The other thing is this concept of good and bad, right and wrong, again, objectively yes,
they don't exist, but when you're on a boat and somebody start putting a hole in that
boat, because there is a context, you understand what is good and what is bad in a very obvious
kind of a way, right? Now, if your boat end up sinking, you might find some kind of a
treasure that's been buried, you know, under the, you know, wrecks of a ship under the
ocean and all that. Yes, that's a possibility, but also it's a suggestion that there is no
such a thing as absolute good and bad. You know, I was telling someone else very unhappy
about lockdowns during COVID and stuff and very activist against critical race theory.
So I was telling her, hey, without lockdowns, most parents wouldn't have found out what
is being taught at public school in K to 12 education system, including a lot of this
critical race theory. And she said, yeah, you're right. I'm like, well, so lockdowns,
were they good and bad? You know, in the objective sense, you cannot say whether they were good
and bad, because if they end up leading to some kind of a actual enlightenment as a result
of all of this, well, they were all good, but they were also bad because a lot of people
got harmed by them. So I think this is, this is an important thing that people begin to
understand that, Hey, I can be, let's say a conservative Jesus believer, but when someone
like Dave Rubin, who's coming from the left and talking common sense, I can rely on some
of his perspective and some of his realizations in order to build myself that raft that Buddha
talks about, you know, you need a raft to cross the river, but you're doing that on
your own. Eventually, you know, there is no collective salvation. Ultimately, it is being
promised, but it's poisonous, I think.
And it's, that's why we're all on this. And again, it's an irony to talk about the self,
the ego as an illusion, but at the same time, say, look, we're all on this adventure in
a very individualistic way. Look, the world's filled with interesting contradictions. I
think this is just another one of them because, well, like I said, it was that, that's that
whole hero's adventure, but I was going to go somewhere else with that. And then I sort
of got distracted, but maybe to come back to me in a second.
Yeah, voluntary tribalism. You know, we would come together for a lot of different things
and we have great times doing that. You know, at the dinner party, we're a tribe. We got
around because of food and good conversation. And then we go to music festival. We are a
new tribe with a bunch of other people. The problem is you, like in my case, you're born
into a religion called Islam. And then they tell you all throughout your school that if
you leave this religion, it's punishable by death. So you might as well just, you know,
just submit and do all these other things that we're asking you to do, which is very
aligned with where these leftists are, Marxists are coming from. And, you know, interestingly
enough before the Iranian revolution, Marxists and Islamists, they had made an alliance against
the Shah of Iran, who they consider to be puppet of United States. So totalitarians
are always aligned in this pursuit of forced collectivism, forced tribalism based on some,
you know, a utopian ideal that is good for the collective. And, you know, the counter
to that is voluntary tribalism because I don't think we can get rid of tribalism. Tribalism
has been very, very effective and useful. It still is. But so is individuality. This
ability to be able to opt in and opt out at any given time, for any given reason, based
on whatever kind of objective that you individually have, that you can find other people share
that objective with you. And when you're done with that objective, you go and, you know,
find your own way.
And actually, that's excellent. I would probably, like from my view, I would just, we're talking
about the same things using different words. I'd probably say like playful tribalism versus
serious tribalism. And so when you're playful with it, you know, then you switch modes and
suddenly I'm a musician talking to musicians, and that's my tribe. And then maybe, you know,
you switch and then, you know, within a fraction of a second, you're doing so. But it's like
you said, I love that idea, like, you know, voluntary tribalism, because then that puts
the individual and to break out of that collective. What I was gonna mention is, you know, it
gives you, you know, Carrie Smith, she does the podcast, I think, Unsafe Spaces.
Oh, yeah, I heard the name, yes, and the podcast.
So there's a couple things I would suggest, if you're watching this, that because she
was very much into the cult, and she describes it as a cult, like the leftist cult, she adopted
this viewpoint, like everything is racist, everything is sexist, and just like, you know,
confirmation bias, she just found it, of course, because that's the way it works. And so I
was talking to her, just texting or something, and I said, what could I have said to you
that would have broken you out of that mindset? You know, how could I have woken you up from
being woke? I mean, and she was like, that's a great question, and I think she pondered
on it, she never got back to me on it, because I think it's like, it's such an individual
process that, like, she was on her own, it was her who woke up from it. She was the one
who suddenly realized that the collect, she didn't want to be part of the collective anymore,
and she wanted some choice. And actually, she even kind of describes, like, you know,
this idea, like, now she has tribes and stuff, but they're all, you know, very voluntary,
and you're not committed, you're not signing your life away to anyone. So you can quit
a tribe at any time, and it's not a lifelong, and there's no reason why you can't be part
of inconsistent tribes. And so maybe, you know, A and B would never get along, but you
have no problem being part of A and B. And so that's a flexibility, and I think that's
really important. I would also, when I was, you know, just so many things that happened
last 100 years, we just, we so quickly forget. And I'm sure you're familiar with Jim Jones
and Jonestown and the whole cult and the capacity of them to drink the Kool-Aid, which I really
don't like that expression because I don't know if you're familiar with the details,
but he was literally too cheap to buy Kool-Aid. He bought Flavor-Aid, which just seems to
be like, look, you know, like everyone's, it's like you're doing this massive act of
insanity, and yet somehow you're worried about the budget. It just shows the complexity and,
you know, inconsistencies in how disturbed his thinking was. But not everyone, one of
the things that was super important about the documentary, even though it was horrific
and it was almost a thousand people that died, not everyone did. So we can always look with
these massive, you know, conformity, and we find people who found themselves, you know,
it was an older woman, I think, who hid under a bed and survived Jonestown. So I think that's
really hopeful. And I guess that's why I'm hopeful about this. I think we're gonna find
our individual, we're gonna find the importance of, I just like the way you put that. I think
we're gonna find the importance of having a voluntary tribe to be able to pick and choose
what tribes we are. And that really satisfies the old program. It gives it something to
do. It satisfies its needs, but it doesn't create, you know, the massive collective of
one single tribe that's, you know, kind of, like I said, steamrolling over everyone else.
And that's when, you know, that's the real tragedy. So the 20th century was that that
one tribe got so big and then it got so massive and it was capable of inflicting so much damage
that we don't wanna have any one tribe get that big again. I mean, we're always, you
know, going around our ancestors' groups of 50 to 100 max. We're not used to these kind
of, you know, millions of people being communist or millions of people being any one tribe.
I mean, that's just something that our programming isn't adapted to deal with. So I do think
there's hope, but I do think it lies in that individuality and finding your own path, which
is always difficult to do. But, you know, who is it? The mythologist Joseph Campbell
said, follow your bliss. You know, that's a great pointer to finding your own path because
some of these paths are just dreadful. You know, I think the biggest thing I've noticed
over the last 10 years, I used to go into a classroom and I'm not much of a comedian,
but as a professor, you know, I do my best and I'll do weird jokes and stuff. And I used
to get a classroom going. I mean, we would just have fun and it was all light and playful.
And I think the biggest thing I've noticed over the last 10 years is I walk into a classroom
that like the energy is just, you can feel it. It's different. It's dreadful. It's like,
what can we find that's wrong with everything? And I think we've done real disservice to
students because, you know, that's a recipe for depression. It's a recipe for anxiety.
And we shouldn't really be doing that to them. You know, I'm surprised there isn't some kind
of class action lawsuit where millions of students all get together and realize that
what they bought in their education at the university was not what was sold to them.
And just do a massive class action lawsuit and say, we want our money back because you
said you were going to, you know, you said you were going to teach sociology and, you
know, I came out a Marxist. I mean, you know, so, and that may happen. I've kind of been
waiting around and I'm just surprised it hasn't already.
Well, I think we're getting to something similar to that. Because one of the reasons that this
Virginia election went the way it did was because the Democrat, McAuliffe, he said parents
shouldn't tell school what to teach to their children. And that was the point that everything
began to shift because people are like, and you know, this is not something that is limited
to that race. This is a motto of that movement. Washington Post came out a couple of days
after that saying parents claim they have the right to shape their kids' school curriculum.
They don't. I'm like, what? So for a lot of people, I think, because, you know, the result
in Virginia couldn't have happened only with Republican votes. It must, they must have
include some Democrats and many independents going and voting for this Republican governor
because there are more. It's like by, by a million, I think that there's a difference
between registered Democrats in Virginia, but people, you know, when it gets to their
pockets and it gets to their children, it must be some kind of a, you know, organic
evolutionary thing that you forget everything else. And this is the most important thing.
And that is exactly why the left is targeting your money and your children. Because if you
don't have money, you don't have choice. If you're giving up your children at age three
or four that these people are pushing for, then, you know, there isn't that far of a
difference from there to Jonestown, which I think it's also interesting to mention Jonestown
as far as I know, they're blaming the dude, Jim Jones for all of it from the beginning
to the end. But apparently towards the end, he was so drugged up and messed up that he
wasn't really in charge of things. So there were a lot of women within that group that
carry on with, you know, all the operation and all the ideas and all those things, which,
you know, again, there are leaders who are pushing this kind of thing, but there are
millions of people who are empowering it. When they're giving you a snitch line to snitch
on your neighbor, for example, in Los Angeles, if they're having party, call the mayor's
office so they shut down their electricity and their water, their hydro stuff. And a
lot of people are doing it. And I totally believe it because they used to do that in
Iran all the time, just because it would look good and good students from the perspective
of the government, from the perspective of the authority.
Yeah. I think, like you said a little earlier, that, you know, we have a, it's close to saying
we have a martial arts, we say, you know, everyone has a theory till they get punched
in the face.
Exactly.
We've got all these, you know, political ideologies and stuff, but when it starts hitting, you
know, the family, when it starts hitting, you know, hitting us and things that we really
hold dear, I mean, then you see this with the parents, they stepped in and, you know,
have been extremely vocal about critical race theory and what and I think even if people
are not familiar with the Jane Elliot studies, they know how susceptible kids are to being
taught political philosophies and particularly when the other side isn't being taught. You
know, I don't have any problem with any kind of political philosophy at the university
as long as both sides of the issue.
And just to give you one other example, back when I was in psych, there was a bunch of
students out and they were, you know, at a booth and they were advocating the, or not
advocating, they were criticizing the gender pay gap and, you know, the whole 30 cents
that women make or 70 cents on the dollar that men make a dollar for or something like
that. And I'm like, okay, you know, everyone knows that wage gap debate that's been around
forever, like 30 years. And I said, okay, well, that's fine. But what about the death
gap? And they just looked at me and like, what do you mean the death gap? And so what
about the homeless gap? And they're like, what are you even talking about? I'm like,
well, you realize that like men not only die sooner, but the suicide rate is like astronomically
higher among men than it is with women. The homelessness rate with men is...so I was just
giving them the counterargument. That's all I was doing. I was like, okay, would you rather
die soon or make a little bit more money? And that's assuming that, you know, the gender
pay gap was valid to begin with. But that's the point of debate. And they never heard
the idea, so they were able to reject it. The first time they heard it is when I told
it to them. Like, they never even heard of the death gap. I'm like, how could you go
through a gender studies class and come out thinking that, you know, you want to be an
advocate for social change? Well, how can you be an advocate for social change when
you're hearing one side of the story? Like, what makes you think, you know, why are you
going to be able to change things when you've only heard part of the debate? It amazes me.
Well, there's a wonderful line from Robert...I don't know if we're getting close to the end.
I like to leave it at an optimistic place, but this is a little bit dark. But I think
it's actually a good...it has a positive ending to it. And one of Robert Oppenheimer's, you
know, famous, you know, nukes and all this stuff, but one of his...my favorite quotes
of his, he said, look, it's absolutely obvious the world is going to hell. The only chance
we have of ever stopping this is to stop trying to stop it. And, you know, and it was such
a great thing that Alan Watts used to talk about all the time and that he would say,
you know, and that's why Alan Watts, maybe that's why he's coming back into popularity
because he said, look, all these self-helpers, they're just troublemakers. They're people
with egos and they think they know what they're doing. But, you know, why? It's a terribly
egotistical thing. If you want to go out and change the world, first, sit back and think
why you think you have the wisdom to change it in the right direction. And he even quoted
Confucius, which I've never found the original quote on this. So, you know, fact check that,
I don't know. But he was quoting Confucius and he said, and he was translating it and
he said, and I'm just trying to give a feel for this is just back in the 60s he was talking
about this. But he said, the goody-goodies are the troublemakers of the world. And he
was trying to point out that like, you know, and almost in this Jungian sense, that if
I have a bright persona, I end up having a very dark shadow. So all these advocates for
like, let's all make the world a better place. There's such a long history of those being
the real troublemakers that, you know, I think we need to be really careful who's stepping
up saying, you know, just trust me on this. I'll change the world and I've got a plan
and just kind of close your eyes and just hope it all works out. And I just think we
have to be, you know, the social activism movement has to pause for a little bit, do
some self-reflection and ask a really simple question like, what makes me think I've got
the answers? You know, these are complex problems and it's so rare for us to have such nice,
clear insights into even simple things in our own life, let alone thinking like, look,
I can fix racism by introducing critical race theory. Do you know that? I mean, what makes
you so absolutely, because again, if you're not gonna consider the other side of the debate
and say, well, okay, well maybe critical race theory is gonna make us actually more racist.
If you don't even consider that, then, you know, why are you in charge? Why did you step
up and start telling people what to do? And this is the reason that they don't want to
train thinkers. They want to train activists and they want to get to your children as soon
as they can. So that will become the de facto default state of the world. It's just so obvious.
It's just that more people seem to be waking up to it because, you know, when you go in
United States to buy something and you can't find it on the shelf and you see that people
who run this country are telling you, actually, the problem is that you expecting too much.
So lower your expectation. Then, you know, along with your kid coming home and ask you,
am I evil because I'm white? You know, this is just not a good combination to happen to
anybody, especially people who've been living here. And, you know, Americans are, you guys
are like super nice and super generous, but unbelievably majority of Americans ignorant
of the potential and capacity of evil. That how much worse this whole thing can get if
you just allow these people who are nothing but totalitarians. That's what they are. They're
totalitarians. They don't want any argument. They want submission and they're using ethics
and morality and we are in this place, you know, for better or worse as a result of enlightenment.
That that gotten rid of that centralized supreme authority in the form of God as interpreted
by religions that I don't apply to that. But at the same time, I don't consider myself
being an atheist. I think that concept of the divine divinity has been hijacked by other
totalitarians who are, you know, priests and bishops and all those people. And, you know,
once you got rid of that centralized authority, it brought with it a lot of good, but at the
same time, it replaced academia and professors with churches and priests. And that's where
we are and it cannot go on any longer, you know, because this idea of equity at some
point it will get to genetics and they will like, Oh, actually, we know that we are unequal
at the genetic level. So we have all the rights to alter the genetic of all the white babies
to be to create, you know, this is not science fiction. This can happen within the next five
to 10 years if we don't stop this insanity where it's headed. But I, you know, fortunately,
I see that more people are waking up yet. This does not mean that everything is going
to be great because this can also lead to somewhere even darker than where we are right
now. We just don't know.
Now, you reminded me of another lecture that Alan Watts had where it was just brilliant.
He said, and it would have fit so well in terms of like the real power of diversity
because he was on a genetics committee and they were asking like, you know, what kind
of variables should we consider? And he brought up a really important point to begin with.
He said, look, we're, how do us who are genetically inferior even make a decision about what genetics
superiority even is? We're not in that kind of position. But then he gave, I think, some
of the best advice. He said, whatever you do genetically, make sure you have a vast
diversity because you never know what we're going to deal with. And so, you know, some
of the activists might say, well, hey, we can get rid of toxic masculinity and we can
go in and we can create males that are not completely non-aggressive. And you say, well,
that's a great idea. And then the aliens attack and then you're kind of like, where are those,
you know, men are just going to go out and not even care, you know, just fight like heroes
and they're gone because we think we can predict the future and it's very difficult.
So I like that idea. You know, whatever we do genetically, let's not, because we may
need introverts or we may need extroverts and we may need, you know, for all we know,
we may need, you know, drunken, you know, people we might think, well, if we could just
get rid of these, you know, certain types, the world would be a better place. And you
don't realize how complex systems are balanced out and you can't just take one little thread
and pull on it and not affect the whole thing. And so those are dangerous systems to mess
with. I hope we don't because I don't think we have the wisdom to deal with that type
of complexity.
Yeah. We don't know where we were. We don't know where we are. We don't know where we're
going and neither does anyone else.
That's the wisdom. You know, a lot of spiritual teachers say that wisdom begins with the I
don't know mind and I really like that because that stops a lot of activism in their tracks
because they'll, you know, so much, not all, but some activism starts off with this, like
I know, I have this moral circuit and I know exactly in the same way that people burned
witches knowing that that person was a witch and the inquisition and, you know, we can
go through so much of human history where people, absolute, these people didn't stay
awake at night regretting what they did. They went to sleep, you know, absolutely confident
that they were virtuous and so we have a long human history. But you're right about, you
know, how easy it is to forget about the last century and how it doesn't seem like we're
really getting a very good education and I'll ask students about, you know, some dictate
something that happened, you know, one of the great bloody wars and no one knows anything
about it. I mean, they can't even name like, I mean, people know about Hitler and people
and, you know, they could talk a little bit about Mousetongue or, you know, some of these
other Stalin, I mean, they really don't know the stories of the number of people and so
many people died and they don't even have accurate estimates. I mean, there's so many,
you know, in the millions that it's very difficult to calculate and that could be really important
for us to digest and because what it shows, I think, is that, I mean, this is like a very,
this program for violence and this program for conformity and the conformity, the power
of us to inflict pain on the outgroup in the name of being virtuous is actually remarkable.
We have a long human history of doing this and it might be time and it could be where
we simply recognize the program for what it is and maybe there's hope. I don't know.
I was going to ask you to give a message to the world to end the podcast, but I think
you already did. So I think this is a good place to end it. You said, I hope, I don't
know. Perfect. I think it is, you know, hope is, there's one of my old favorite movies,
Shawshank Redemption, he gives a little speech about hope is the best of things and nothing
good ever dies and I just, I think it's important. We haven't had enough hope, you know. I mean,
there hasn't been that person who stood up and gave us a great speech to kind of act
was we have hope programs too and those hope programs got us through a lot of rough times
but we haven't had that person who got up and gave that speech that turned it on and
just kind of brought it back to life. So we felt hopeful again because, you know, Nietzsche,
when he wrote, when Victor Franco wrote Man's Search for Meaning, he opens it, you know,
about all the concentration camps, his survival and all the suffering, but he opens it up
with a quote by Nietzsche who said, he said, you know, if you have a why, you can deal
with any how and, you know, but that's, it's real close, you know, that purpose, the meaning,
the hope, those things could get us through this, you know, it's possible.
