You know, I'm no longer a Republican or a Democrat. I was both. I was once a Republican,
and then I was a Democrat. I'm a declined estate because both parties are building the
duopoly that we suffer under. We need a major change in government now.
Hello, and welcome to the 50th episode of Neo Human Podcasts. I'm Agabahari,
an agologist on Twitter and Instagram, and you can follow the show on liveinlimbo.com,
iTunes, and YouTube. And with me today, I have Tim Draper. Welcome to Neo Human Podcast, Tim.
Terrific. My pleasure. Good to be here.
It's great to have you. Let's start with your background, the work you've done,
and what are you mainly focused on now these days?
So my background, how far back do you want to go? I'm six.
As far as you feel comfortable going back to?
Well, okay. I was a Stanford electrical engineer and then Harvard MBA, and then I
started Draper Associates, a venture fund, and I spun out an SBIC, a small business investment
company that my father had started, and I borrowed $6 million against that from the government,
and that was the $6 million I was able to start the venture business with.
And so then it looked after three years like all the loans were being called, and it was going to
be very scary and dangerous, and I flew back to the SBA and convinced them that things were
just about around the corner. It was going to be okay, and they somehow went along with it.
And so after that, in 1991, we had a whole bunch of IPOs. The window opened up, and one of those
companies was Parametric Technology, and it made me and my investors about 175 times on the money,
and we were able to pay back all the loans to whatever. I suddenly went to the SBA,
you know, whatever. I suddenly went from being on the SBA's dirt list to their
on their wall as the venture capitalist of the year.
Nice. And how long did that take from zero to that point?
From zero to that point was five or six years, and then I brought on
John Fisher, and then later on, another three years later, I brought in Steve Jurvetson,
and we built a very successful venture firm that had moments where it was the top venture
firm in the world. A lot of that had to do with the fact that we were willing to venture
outside of the Silicon Valley, and we were able to, we backed Skype and Baidu outside the Silicon
Valley. And then about six years ago, I started to go solo and started to invest my own money
alongside investors' money, and when I did that, I set up a whole new ecosystem for entrepreneurship.
I built Draper University, which is attracting entrepreneurs from all over to learn
how to become heroes, and I started Hero City, which is an incubator that allows
entrepreneurs of all types to come in and just hang out for a while, and so we kind of created
this great system where deals come from all over the world, and they come into our office, and we
take a look at them, figure out if there's something we want to find. It's been very exciting, and
since some of our best success came from international companies, we have a, I built
the Draper Venture Network, and there are a series of, I think we've got something like 30 venture
funds from around the world that are part of the network, and that also gives us a great flavor
for what's going on in other parts of the world, and it's great. And then I got really early
involved in Bitcoin and lost them all to Mt. Gox, and then realized that Mt. Gox didn't make Bitcoin
go away, so I figured people really needed it, and so that's why I bid high and won the auction
for Bitcoin when the U.S. Marshal's Office auctioned off the Silk Road Bitcoin. And since then,
we've been sort of the center of all that activity in crypto, so that anybody who's starting an
ICO or a cryptocurrency or a blockchain company, they know they can come to us as sort of a good
first stop. So this has been a very exciting career, and I'm loving it.
Loving it. So you've been, everything that you've done had something to do with technology. How has
the growth of technology helped you with the evolution of your perspective towards the world
as an investor and an individual? Yeah, so it's really interesting to see when I'm a
as a venture capital investor, I'm always looking for where there's an industry that is providing
bad service at a high cost, because those are the industries that are usually monopolies or
oligopolies, and when there's a new technology that comes along, it usually gives an entrepreneur
an opportunity to wedge into that industry. So the internet came along, and it transformed
music and entertainment and communications and information and taxis. All those industries got
completely transformed because the internet was there, and it was this new technology that allowed
in effect, allowed products to spread and information to travel. Well, now, with the
advent of Bitcoin, now we have another one of those, and a new technology, and that technology
is allowing money to travel much more frictionlessly. And it also, when combined with
with all this new data technology and artificial intelligence, has the ability to transform a bunch
of other industries that weren't really that much affected by the internet coming. Banking industry,
real estate, insurance, health care. Health care is going to change in a big way. It's going to be
very data driven. And government itself, I think, needs some transformation. That's the monopoly
that provides the worst service at the highest cost. And it really is the worst service at the
highest cost. It really is the worst kind of monopoly, right? Yeah, it's the kind of monopoly
you think you're stuck with. But it turns out now, government has two layers. They have the
physical layer that is like, you've got to go to the government to see what kind of a building
you're going to build or what services you're going to provide in that building. But then,
there are all these things that can be done virtually, like your pension or
some sort of a welfare state or health care insurance or social security. All of these
can be done at the virtual level. So the geographic borders are no longer important here,
because there's no reason I couldn't get my social security from Chile and my medical
insurance from Canada and maybe a pension from a country that hasn't even been invented yet
and doesn't even have a landmass. So there could be a whole new series of ways people manage
themselves and govern themselves that's coming that isn't tied to the fiefdom that we've
operated under for all these many centuries. So suddenly, you've got finance, enormous industries,
trillion-dollar industries being transformed, financing. Venture capital is being transformed.
In Q3 of last year, there was more money raised in ICOs than there was in venture capital. So our
own industry is getting a transformation. And I'm embracing it. A lot of people kind of ran
and hid in their shells, but I'm embracing it pretty excited about it.
Well, you're embracing it both in business and politics, right? Because I want to ask you about
the CAL 3 proposal. And as far as I understand, blockchain governance was one of the ideas,
if not the principal ideas, that you had in mind for the three states to run themselves
independently, right? Yeah. It was a part of it. Government in California has been pretty much
stagnant for 50 years. Meanwhile, communications and information and all sorts of software
entertainment, they're improving according to Moore's law. They're improving like $1,000
worth of compute power doubles every 18 months. So they're doubling in value every 18 months,
but our government services have been stagnant, even decreased in value over that same period
of time. So this is sort of an interesting opportunity. There's a new technology that can
actually improve government services. And I thought three Californias would be an opportunity for
the worst state, the worst government. It's a great state to live in, but although they say
quality of life, we're the worst quality of life. So we're the worst government. It provides the
worst service at the highest cost. Education's gone from first to 47th. We are now 50th as a
place to do business. We're 50th in quality of life because people can't afford the housing and
the schools are bad and all that. And so I was looking and I was saying, well, this is an
opportunity to create three new states that were fresh and kind of reboot the governance of this
landmass. And what a great opportunity with the blockchain and Bitcoin available. All of these
smart contracts and artificial intelligence and big data, all of them could easily replace
the bureaucrats we have in place in California. And those bureaucrats can go find better things
to do and we can be better managed or better governed through the cloud. And that is something
that the Bunions, the bureaucratic unions, don't like because they were going to lose their people.
And so they did everything they could to thwart me. First with six Californias, they made it so
that the signature counters discounted the number of signatures that I had enough so that it wouldn't
qualify. And then this time, they did it by, we qualified because we got twice as many signatures
as we needed. So there was no way they could say they were no good.
How many signatures did they get? Like 800,000, something like that?
Yeah, we got 650,000 the second. And we needed 300 and something thousand. And so we got all these
signatures and the Secretary of State's office said, okay, and so we were proposition nine.
And so the Bunions set up a shill non-profit corporation to sue us and make it so that the
California Supreme Court judges would have to vote on it just before they were about to print
the ballots. And so that they wouldn't have to print them twice. They just yanked it off the
ballot arbitrarily. That's crazy. And so you don't get to vote on it. I don't get to vote on it.
The only people that got to vote on it were the six Supreme Court justices. So they basically yanked
democracy away from us. And so it is going to be a challenge because these people,
don't want to lose their jobs. They're very concerned about losing their jobs. But their
jobs and their lives are going to be so much better if we have, you know, when you can use
artificial intelligence, you should use artificial intelligence. And it makes you kind of move beyond
it. I mean, if I can have, you know, a car drive me, and I can drive a car, and I can drive a car,
you know, a car drive me without a driver in it, terrific. That's even better than having the
driver have to drive around. Driver can drive around on their own if they like. But they've
got the freedom. And they've been freed up into the economy. And they can do other things. They can
go help us get off the planet or go to help us. They can grow the economy, they can spend money,
they can earn money, they can do lots of different things. So this is, I think people
didn't understand it at first. It was interesting. Our polling went from 8% to 12% to 17% to 27%,
with 35% undecided. And I think that's what the Bunyan saw. They saw that this was a very real
possibility. And so that made them very nervous. And that's why they sued and got the poll.
They got the Supreme Court to yank it off the ballot. It was unprecedented. No one has ever,
the Supreme Court has never done that before the vote. It's like un-American.
Yeah, and definitely not democratic, right? So that's out of window right there.
No, the whole point of it, democracy, is that the people help run, the government works for the
people, not the other way around. And somehow it's, you know, here the people said,
we want to vote. And the government said, we're not going to let you.
Now, Elon Musk was on Joe Rogan's podcast. I don't know if you listened to it. Very interesting.
And he was talking about how he became a fatalist with respect to artificial intelligence,
because he tried to warn people of the dangers of not adapting as fast as we should, you know,
including people in the Congress. And nobody really cared about what he was saying. That's
basically what he was saying. So I'm a fatalist now, just to basically keep my own sanity.
Do you think the government of the United States qualified to address any of these issues? You know,
we've seen some of the tech CEOs testifying in Senate and Congress hearings. And how do you
think government is doing compared to all the advancement and developments that have been
happening? It's interesting, because a lot of these governments are run by very elderly people
who have had very full lives, so that their judgment should generally be better. But they
are not early adopters of technology. And so here, here's sort of an example. Let's say there's a
23 year old, and he's just coming out of college, and he's $200,000 in debt. And, and this is
typical, they've gone to college, and then they've had long big loans, and they're deeply in debt.
And there's no real way for them to get out of debt, other than to just sort of pay it off over
a very, very long time. And then all of a sudden, there's this new currency that comes along,
Bitcoin, and, and this new currency is, is suddenly available, and, and spreading and growing and
value and exciting and frictionless and decentralized, not tied to some grandpa's fiefdom.
And they were saying, you know, well, grandpa set this thing up so that I was 200,000 bucks in debt,
and I was educated in a way that really wasn't very valuable to me. And all of a sudden, now,
there's this interesting opportunity for me. And I think that's what's going on. And now you've got
the grandfathers trying to figure out how to regulate the grandchildren who are coming out
with all these great ideas for new ways of tokenizing things and building things. To the
grandfathers, this is, they might as well speaking, been speaking in Martian. They're, they don't,
they don't understand what's going on. They don't like the idea of a change because, hey, let's face
it, they've built up a whole stack of dollars. And they they're thinking, wait, wait, my dollars
may not be worth as much because there's this new currency that's better frictionless. And
less decentralized, not tied to any, you know, frivolous political source. This is a big change.
This is a sea change. And, and it's generational. You know, if I go to, if I go to somebody,
typical person about my age, who says, and I say, Hey,
can I pay in Bitcoin? They say, they said, absolutely not. I need dollars. And if you go
to somebody who's about 30 years old, you say, Hey, can I pay in Bitcoin? They said, yeah,
I'll do it for you. Even if you do it in line at Starbucks, you can say to the barista, hey,
can I pay in Bitcoin? And if that guy says, sorry, God, they don't have it here yet. The
guy behind you in line says, I'll take your Bitcoin and I'll pay in fiat. And so, so I think the,
the younger group, the up and comers, the ones who are going to kind of make the future
are loving this new technology, they're loving the new currency, they're loving all of that great,
all the great things that could potentially happen with it. And the old people, they're
loving it. And the older generation who are kind of running the old monopolistic system, are
either threatened by it or curious to it. It's interesting, you know, in China,
that guy, the guy who's declared himself king is, is afraid of all of this, right? He lives in,
in fear and, and any loathes, fear and loathing, fears and loathes, the idea of some other currency
that he doesn't control. The SEC in the US is somewhere in between where they're kind of going,
well, we know we need to protect the widows, but we don't want to give up all this great technology
that's going to come out of this. And so they, they're trying to balance it. And in, in Tokyo,
in Japan, Japanese said, Bitcoin's a national currency, here's how you do an ICO, come to our
country. And, and you're seeing that in a lot of smaller countries, Malta, Gibraltar, Singapore,
Estonia, where they're opening up and saying, hey, come to our country. We are open to this new
currency. We're open to this new way of life. And we're not, we're not obsessed with our own
currency. And we do understand that our own currency is subject to political whims. And
that this new currency is more liquid and more transparent and more open. And I can take my
Bitcoin anywhere. I mean, I can go anywhere. I can pull down my Bitcoin. And all of these other
currencies around the world are kind of limited to some geographical area. Are you in favor of a
total free market model for cryptocurrencies or wouldn't or wouldn't mind some regulations and
oversight overall, because that's the problem that government has with them, right? That they can be
used for terrorism and all the other negative things that they claim. Well, actually, the,
the most dangerous currency is, is the paper dollar. That's the one that can't be tracked.
The Bitcoin is completely trackable. In fact, the US Marshals Office has been catching
all of these criminals who were trying to use Bitcoin to do nefarious things, because the
blockchain is, is secure. And if somebody, now if somebody gets Bitcoin, they're not caught then.
But, but what happens then is the Marshall's Office says, Oh, well, that's, that's where the
bitcoins being held. Soon as it moves, we move in. And, and so as soon as people who are nefarious,
try to spend their Bitcoin, they're caught. That's not true with, with paper money.
So actually, you are much more secure as a population if you are using Bitcoin. And in fact,
the banks are getting hacked at every day. All the banks are easily hacked now by plenty of
software developers who come after them in lots of different ways. But the Bitcoin blockchain has
never been hacked. There's been hacks around it in various currencies. But the Bitcoin blockchain
has never been hacked. It is the most secure currency we have on the earth. And, and more and
more miners are proving that to be the case. Every time a new miner is added, the currency
becomes more secure. Do you think the argument for anonymity of a coin like Monero, for example,
in contrast to traceability of Bitcoin has any kind of ground long term wise? And if so,
what would stop again, an alternative community that use anonymous coins on blockchain to
conduct their own business? I warn people all the time. Monero is also on a blockchain,
all of those around a blockchain, you are not, you are not incognito, you act absolutely can
be found out. And so I don't know why people just don't say, hey, let's open up, we're going to be
transparent. Here's my Bitcoin. This is where it is. No problem. And why they're trying to use these
dark places, because they're just gonna, I mean, they're gonna be caught. There's, there's no
question about it. They are on a blockchain, they're going to be caught if they're doing
something nefarious. So yeah, I don't buy the fact that some of them say, oh, yeah, we're the dark
coin or the Monero or whatever, I don't buy it. Because no matter what, they're all going to
eventually open up. So there is no true anonymous coin as of yet, or? Well, I think the criminals
are trying to stay ahead of the law. Right. But I don't think they can. I mean, eventually,
they all get caught. What are the most exciting developments and areas in tech for you today?
We know blockchain is one of them. Well, I'll give you one kind of fun example. And that is,
in healthcare, let's say, you put you control your data, okay, flip it around, right now,
the hospital has all the data, you control your data, it's on the blockchain, you're using a,
a using Bitcoin as a, as an insurance through the insurance program, you're paying in Bitcoin and
you're, and the all your medical visits are paid in Bitcoin. And you're putting all of your
information, your medical records, your, your blood test results, your genetic history, that all goes
into the cloud. But not just that, your Fitbit results, what you had for breakfast, where you
traveled recently, what your kind of work you've been doing, how much travel you've done, what
stress you've been under all those things are put into your data. And then that data goes up into
the cloud. And then you say, I've got a headache. Okay, if you say you've got a headache, it might
be like, Oh, take two aspirin and call me in the morning, I say I've got a headache. They say, Oh,
boy, you've been on Fire Island, you might have Lyme tick disease. And we need antibiotics. And so no
doctor in the world in 12 years can memorize all of that data. And all of the, all of the little
changes that would happen to people's lives, as well as people taking their information, putting
it into the cloud and having the artificial intelligence of the cloud, the deep learning of
the cloud, big data of the cloud, all combine and get you your diagnosis. This is going to be a
magic time, people are going to be get much better, better care and your doctor, I suspect will be
become more of a consultant than a than a direct dictator of what you should be doing. And, and that
will be because they will have this, this advisor with them, which is the cloud. And then your data,
you'll get money for selling your data into the drug companies and the hospitals and whoever else
you want to sell your data into. Now, a lot of people say that any technological progress works
as best as a society that adapts it. So how are we doing as a society in your opinion? Because I
remember a couple of years ago, people were attacking other people who were wearing Google
glasses, I think it was in San Francisco, or we're getting really pissed off at tech companies
because of rise in the housing price. And they were they were blaming tech, so they should blame
government there. California allows people to create startups, it allows those startups to become
worth something. But then as soon as those startups want to employ people, California makes it
untenable to operate here. I mean, sure, there are a few, you know, Facebook still has their headquarters
here, Salesforce. But most of them, when they get big, Tesla's battery factory is a perfect example,
they're going to set up a battery factory is going to employ 10s of 1000s of people. Well, they,
they wanted to put it here in California, but California made it untenable. And they had to
push it out so that they looked around, they went to Nevada instead. Now, what happens then?
All the jobs leave California. And so who's left? The people who made a bunch of money on that,
on that startup, and these people who can't get jobs because all the jobs just left. And California
says, Oh, it must be the business people, and it must be the tech people, it must be the something
people, it must be the something people. It's not it's the government shoving big businesses out of
the state, we want the big businesses here, so that they can employ the middle class so that they
can employ those people who are right now out on the street and homeless, because I am jobless,
because we don't have the jobs for them. But we would have if we had made it so that
put his battery factory here, or we would have if, if they hadn't pushed Sony and all of the
studios out of the state, so that they go and they do their their filming somewhere else.
Oh, Amazon was going to put their second headquarters somewhere else.
California didn't even make the second cut. They were thinking, Yeah, well, we'll check out
Sacramento when they were there for like 10 seconds, and they realized, Oh, my God,
these guys are going to regulate us to death. There's no way we want to employ people here.
So would you be in favor of a Republican governor for California if that person runs on the policies
that are closer to what you were saying as a business ideal? You know, I'm not I'm no longer
a Republican or a Democrat. I was both I was once a Republican, and then I was a Democrat. I'm a
declined estate, because both parties are building the duopoly that we suffer under.
We need we need a major change in government. Now, somehow, the bunions have grown to be where
they're, they're so big and so powerful, we don't really have a representative government anymore,
right, as proven by Cal three. So, so I don't know whether a Republican or a Democrat will make any
difference. I think it has to do with a major overhaul to the system. And, and that's not going
to happen unless somebody, unless the Supreme Court lets Cal three go through or, or something
else. I mean, and of course, the you know, the press will beat it down for a long time before
they embrace it and say, Oh, yeah, it was our idea all along. You ever watch the watch a sports game
where it's sort of an underdog somehow comes and wins the game in the last minute, right?
You listen to the sportscasters and they go, Oh, yeah, I knew this was gonna happen. So and so,
you know, this team, the favorites gonna win and that's the way it's gonna be and blah, blah, blah,
how great they all are. And then all of a sudden, the underdog comes and overthrows them and wins
the game. And, and then they go, Oh, boy, that guy so and so is so great. We knew about it all along.
He came from nowhere, blah, blah, blah. And, and there's no comment on like, we got it so wrong
before. But right now, the press is just sort of, you know, the problem that supports what the
government's doing. And, oh, we just leave it the way it is. And we'll slowly all walk off a cliff,
as opposed to, hey, there are some interesting things happening here. We have a real problem.
Let's wake up. But I think that's the free press is a wonderful thing here, because it is, it is
so valuable to the United States. It, I mean, at least people can take shots at their president,
that at least people can say what they think. I guess unless the Supreme Court of California
rules against them. Yeah, that's very unfortunate. It's worse than that. It's like 250 years of a
democracy that was working, and all of a sudden, they're clamping it down. But are you going to
push for another, not a form of Cal 3 like model, maybe in California or even somewhere else?
Well, maybe you can do that. I'm exhausted. And I got blindsided twice. Yeah, so you've had enough.
Maybe one of our listeners is going to listen and say, Hey, how do we, how do we make this better?
Honestly, I see the government, as I mentioned in these hearings and stuff, and you know, just the
questions and the fight over, you know, it's just ridiculous. And you're like, nobody's talking
about artificial intelligence. Nobody's talking about big data. Nobody's talking about big data.
Nobody's talking about algorithms. They started talking about algorithms with respect to social
media, when you know, but they don't really understand what's going on. I know, I wish they
would. But, you know, we're, we, we bolt them in. And then we keep them in forever. I mean,
there are term limits on some of them, I guess, we keep them in forever. But what's worse than,
than the politicians, because the politicians actually have to compete for their jobs,
or the bureaucrats, the bunions, they don't have to do anything. They can stay there forever.
They look at politics like a new president, new president should be like, hey, this is awesome.
We got a new president. But they look at the new president, they say, you'll be here for four years,
maybe eight, we're here forever. Any policies you put in, we can sit on.
Is that a deep state that Trump's talking about?
I'm not sure what Trump's talking about. But when we had, there were some brilliant people that put
together this jobs act. And it went through and it passed through law, the Congress passed it,
the president signed it. And, and, and it was going to allow crowdfunding, it was going to allow
small investors to invest in private companies, it was going to allow a whole bunch of things
that were going to create a lot of jobs. The bureaucrats didn't like it. And they just sat on
it forever. And then they just kept adding more and more terms. And they took all of the wings
off of the law. And so now, you know, you see any crowdfundings? I mean, we did a little bit with
Meet the Drapers, but, but I'm not seeing a lot of crowdfundings. Because they've just they've
added so many hurdles and so much bureaucracy and so many forms to fill out. They've basically taken
the wings off of that. What's the solution to go beyond them? Well, I think you've got to be able to,
you know, unions were were started so people could take care of themselves and gang up if,
if a boss was giving them bad, a bad shake, where it's like the the mines were bad for their health
or the, you know, the factory was making them work too many hours or they couldn't get sleep,
or is unsafe. And those are all good uses of a union. But right now, the Bunions have negotiated
for that the public unions have negotiated for where, where we go out and we pay the bills
and, and pay for our government. Well, the average government employee makes more money
than the average private citizen. And they take longer vacations. And they have a shorter work
week. And they have a bigger pension. And so somehow, these people who are who we have
hired to go in there, are not leaving ever. And, and are not even allowing the new laws to go
through. So if you want something to happen, it's got to start with a bunions. Do you see any country
that is doing a good job with adapting to new form of technology in in terms of running their
country? Yeah, Japan, Japan, right, right. Awesome. And Singapore, of course, for years has been
awesome. And China before they got this new dictator, China before they got the new dictator,
they were open, they had a free market, they were encouraging innovation, they were driving
business, things were going well, people were getting employed, the quality of life had gone
way up. Poverty was going way down. And, and then now they got a dictator who, who is controlling
everything and, and, and the free markets are getting pulled back on. Well, and now all of
these little countries, Malta and Gibraltar and Cayman and Bermuda and Singapore, Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania, all these smaller countries are looking at this as a big opportunity. And
they are embracing new technologies or seeing what they can do to make it better.
Yeah, something that is very interesting about Japan is that how society has adapted already to
different forms of robotics and technology, you know, from anime and cartoons to those crazy
vending machines and their robot guides all around shopping mall. There is no this kind of a social
acceptance of robotics in the United States. Would you agree? Well, in the US, they like to
sell fear in the, in the news. And so they want, they want to, there are probably equal, an equal
number of stories saying how unions, I mean, how robots are going to take over the world or, or
artificial intelligence is going to take all our jobs. There are probably more stories about that
than all the really cool things that are going to happen because of robotics and artificial
intelligence. I mean, we're working, we've got a company that makes a, makes a pizza with a robot.
So cool. And a perfect pizza every time. And artificial intelligence is, is making it so that
we are, by the way, we're all operating with artificial intelligence today. We just don't,
we just don't recognize it as such. The spell checker, that's artificial intelligence. The,
the recommendation engines from the social media, that's artificial intelligence. Those things are
good. They're great. We get better recommendations. We spell better. We, all those things are just like
an intelligence item that's moved, moved forward. And hey, I mean, if, if I'm able to raise, the
moment I'm able to raise a fund all in Bitcoin, fund companies all in Bitcoin and have those
companies pay all their employees and suppliers all in Bitcoin, that's the moment I will no longer
need an accountant. So think of all those really smart people who are accountants and what all the
cool things they can do are. And so I think it's just better. I think the biggest challenge so far
is that what, what is going to happen to the user's data and how they can be prevented from being
manipulated or, you know, I've always found the business model of Facebook being a platform that
depends on users data, but then the users are not getting paid by generating data and sharing data.
So that's where our, that's where our company data wall, it really has it right. They give you
control of your own data. So you can figure out whether you want to use it for this ad, use it
for this company, and you get paid for that. So I think that's going to be the future of data and
it has to be flipped from whether the way it works now. But I think that's going to be happening.
Allow me to ask you the last question that I ask all my guests. If you come across an intelligent
alien from a different civilization, what would you say is the worst thing humanity has done and
what would you say is our greatest achievement? The worst thing is clearly wars. I think the
greatest achievement is yet to come.
