Nothing, in my opinion, has stopped so much creation and rationality in the human race
as religion.
Hello and welcome to the twelfth episode of Neo Human Podcast.
I'm Agha Bahari at Aghologist on Twitter and Instagram.
You can follow the show on iTunes or liveinlimbo.com and soon on YouTube.
My guest this week is Zoltan Isfand.
Welcome to the show, Zoltan.
Thank you so much for having me.
Yeah, it's my pleasure.
I wanted to give you some sort of a title like Zoltan Isfand This, but you have done
so many different things and are doing so many different things.
I think it would be best to hear it from you, your background, some of the works that you've
done and some of the works that you're doing now.
Well, sure.
You know, as you said, my name is Zoltan Isfand and I think the biggest thing is I'm currently
a 2016 U.S. presidential candidate and I'm an advocate for science and technology, my
entire platform revolves around using those kinds of things to make the world and America
a better place.
And for anyone that doesn't know what transhumanism is, it's a social movement of a few million
people around the world that want to use science and technology to radically modify the human
being and also to to improve the human experience.
Yeah, so making America better has nothing to do with making America great again, I would
assume.
No, nothing to do with each other.
But you know, really what it has to do with is just how can Americans apply radical science
and technology in their lives to become a better human beings?
We can live much longer, we can have more powers, we can do cooler things.
So it's really about how that science and technology can be used and if we can actually
develop that science and technology.
How is the presidential campaign going and I'm also going to ask you about how did you
find out the message is being received across the U.S. because you went across the country
pretty much with the with the immortality bus, which we're going to talk a little about
as well.
But how do you find people receiving the message of science and technology?
Well, you know, on the East and West Coast, the message is received really well.
The states that have major technology companies and impacts and stuff like that, generally
it's well received.
In parts of the middle of America and the deep south, you know, the message was not
so well received.
I mean, everybody was friendly on my four month bus tour from San Francisco to Washington,
D.C.
But clearly like California, New York were real highlights for, you know, we could have
events every day in California, New York.
Or much more difficult to get events in in the middle of the country or in the south,
because sometimes people really don't want to put them on for you.
They're just not sure if what I'm trying to do is good or bad.
Do you find that transhumanism is like kind of a new atheism, the way that atheism was
being treated maybe like 10 years ago?
It's much more acceptable now.
Well, yeah, and transhumanism is growing.
And it also depends on where I am.
If I'm in the deep south, I may not even use the word transhumanism so much because
it just creates this this mean response.
But if I use the words radical science and technology, I think a lot more people are
interested.
Whereas if I'm on the West Coast or the East Coast, I will try to use the word transhumanism.
So everyone kind of understands exactly what I mean.
I mean, you know, telepathy via headsets, I mean, chip implants, I mean, exoskeleton
suits, driverless technology, I mean, AI.
So it really depends on where I go, how I try to give out my message, because you can
definitely overload people in the south and in the middle of the country if you come on
too strong and they will not like it, they'll let you know they don't like it.
I would imagine it would be a little hard not to talk about transhumanism when you founded
a party called the transhumanist party and running as a candidate, right?
Of course, of course.
And you know, I always get into it.
It just really is a matter of how one does it, because one has to be diplomatic when
they're dealing with very religious people who know the word transhumanism and associate
it with ideas of the Antichrist, with ideas of end of times revelations and stuff like
that.
Especially in my bus tour, when people found out I had a chip in my hand, it's like you
could see, you could feel the energy and people change.
All of a sudden they're like, wow, mark of the beast.
And I'm like, actually, no, it's just something that's going to be convenient.
We can pay with it.
We can do all sorts of cool things with my implant.
And they don't see it like that.
They still see it like, wow, mark of the beast, you know, this is the Antichrist technology.
So a lot of it is just presentation.
If you present it in a nice way, you talk about virtual reality, you talk about using
science to make people live longer and you know, then I think a lot of people are open
to transhumanism.
If you talk about it in terms of transhumanists want to become gods by merging with machines,
well, then you turn off a lot of people.
So you know, I adjust how I speak about it.
Do you see religion on the way?
I mean, you're an outspoken atheist.
Do you see any place for religion in a political structure of the future?
Well, yes, I do, unfortunately, because I would prefer there to be, you know, not religion,
but just spirituality and people to kind of go off on those tangents if they want.
But unfortunately, I think the way our world is working is, so, you know, here's the situation.
Every Supreme Court justice, our president and all 535 members of Congress are religious
and believe in an afterlife, at least right now on paper.
And because of transhumanism, because of life extension technology, all those people are
going to be living longer than ever.
So there's the irony.
But as a result, they're not about to give up their religion that they've been brought
up with for 50, 60 years.
So they're going to be living long enough to make the decisions for this country 20,
30 years in the future.
And it's unavoidable that religion will probably survive because of those reasons.
So we have to get used to the idea that religion will play a part in our technological development
and our technological evolution.
At the same time, I see that a non-religious world is growing, and my hope is that religion
will evolve as well into something that's much less fundamental and much more about
the personal relationship one has with their own spirituality and with a creator if they
want to have that.
And, you know, technically, I say I'm an atheist for reasons of kind of fighting against the
system, but I'm truly an agnostic.
You know, I have no idea what has happened.
I have no idea if there's aliens out there that have created human beings.
I have no idea if there's an all-knowing creator.
I have no idea, in fact, if there's Jesus out there.
I mean, I just don't know.
Because religion has been so oppressive in society, I consistently call myself an atheist
and write atheist articles.
But what the future holds will probably be something that's quasi-religious and based
on a Judeo-Christian framework, but hopefully it will be one that's much more lenient towards
allowing human beings to evolve into trans-human beings.
You mentioned the spirituality.
How are you defining the spirituality as a trans-humanist?
Well, you know, the fact is, one of the things I got to say, one of the most important ideas
that's happened to me in the last five years, and I think a lot of scientists, they now
say virtually every NASA scientist believes in other species or whatever, aliens out there,
it sounds totally insane.
But the reality is that there are a trillion galaxies, and each galaxy has about 500 planets
and stars.
The chances of there not being millions of life forms out there, you know, and millions
of life forms that are more advanced than human beings that have already reached the
singularity, that have already reached incredible intelligence levels way beyond ours, of course
they have.
I mean, from a statistical perspective, that's 100%.
And virtually every NASA scientist believes that these days.
In the last five years, I've grown to understand this theory as well.
The point is that it opens up our idea of spirituality.
It opens up our idea of interconnectivity.
It opens up our idea of what is possible for us as a species.
We may evolve into a hive mind.
We may evolve into machines where we can connect directly to one another.
We feel more empathy.
We feel more love.
We feel more reason, reasonability, reasonableness, I hope.
You know, so where are we going?
Where's spirituality?
I'm sure it's going to be tied into a more complex version of ourselves and how we interpret
the technology that our lives are imbued with.
It may also involve, you know, reaching out to the stars and seeing if anything else is
out there that's willing to listen and or willing to, you know, interfere with our lives
or maybe it already has.
The point is that it's just spirituality is in the universe that has a trillion galaxies
and 500 million, a billion planets, stars each.
I mean, that number is off the charts.
We must take spirituality in a very different way.
We easily could be living in a holographic universe created by some species that was
created by some species.
We just have to figure all those things in.
And I think that's where my spirituality lies.
I haven't figured it out yet, but I do believe that there must be other things out there
that have a lot to teach us.
Do you know of any organization, because this sounds very interesting, all these terms have
to be taken, I think, with a grain of salt, spirituality, religion, because they've been
abused for so many years, right?
Do you know any kind of organization in the US, Canada, or anywhere in Europe, I would
assume, that promoting spirituality based on technology and the way that we are advancing
and evolving, like what you described?
Yes, yes.
I mean, I know a couple of them.
The problem is that they're too religious still for me.
You know, like TerraSem is a very interesting organization that has a quasi-spiritual emphasis.
They're a group out of Florida that kind of trying to upload their minds.
This is an organization by Martin Ruffflat.
Yes, yes.
And I like the organization, though it is still a little bit too fundamental for me
in terms of, does it need to be so spiritually oriented?
And they also accept all sorts of religions, no matter how formal that is.
The issue, though, is that I'm just not sure.
It just still feels too feely and touchy for me, whereas I really would like to see an
atheist revolution that then looks at what is spirituality from a completely secular
point of view, whereas I feel like TerraSem is kind of, was born out of the religions
that exist in the world and made to adapt to a more futuristic version.
But don't get me wrong, the TerraSem people, they are exactly the kind of spiritual people
I'd like to have as friends, but I still feel it's a little bit too formal.
The Church of Perpetual Life is a little bit closer to what I like.
They are a community of people that use the word church in their title, but they're basically
mostly non-religious people that believe entirely in science and technology, and they gather
to a house of worship, not to worship science and technology.
Well, they're not worshiping it, but they get around to celebrate it, and that's what
I like.
I like an organization that celebrates technology and science, not worship celebrates, because
that's exactly what I do as a transhumanist, as a presidential candidate.
I'm going around the country saying, look, here is the good news.
The good news is we can conquer death with science and technology.
It's nothing crazy about it.
It's just, you know, I'm a scientist who's a, or I'm a science popularizer who's excited
about what's happening.
So that's how I hopefully will see the form of spirituality and religion evolve into the
next 20 years, at least here in America.
Now, it's possible that it may not evolve that way, and it may remain very fundamental,
but hopefully it's going to grow up.
The interest in transhumanism, as you mentioned, they happen in wide spectrum of backgrounds
from scientists and hobbyists and religious people.
There have been some backlashes since you started the transhumanist party and elevated,
I would say, when you decided to run for president.
There were people who argued, one, you had claimed the leadership of a transhumanist
movement all to yourself, and two, you want the leadership only for yourself and haven't
been willing to share it with anyone else and all this kind of argument.
There have been a petition against you, I think.
Is that the case?
Yes or no?
And why is that the case, if it is?
Well, it's absolutely not the case that I claimed leadership of anything except for
the transhumanist party, and I also, you know, I mean, I didn't necessarily claim leadership.
I was nominated by the three other officers at the time to run as a presidential candidate,
which kind of naturally gave me the leadership.
So you have to understand the transhumanist party right now is a non-recognized FEC party.
So it's, you know, it depends on what you interpret as parties.
In America, right, there are thousands of political parties.
You can form, legally form, a political party by two people getting together and having
a conversation and say, let's make a party.
And that's it.
That's all it takes to make a political party.
People think that a political party has to be this or this, no, no, no.
A legal political party, according to the laws of the land, two people have to get together
and create a name, and that's it.
That's essentially it.
One has to be an officer and one has to be a treasurer.
Those are the technical things.
And so I did that.
You know, I did that when none other existed and I wasn't sure what was going to happen.
We brought on some more people.
We made our party a non-membership party, so there's no, you know, no one's paying
dues and no one's, no one belongs, no one's beholden to the party.
We have advisors that advise and it's a very informal affair.
I'm not, you know, we're trying to grow state parties, but I'm not trying to grow it so
that I hold people accountable for anything.
State parties, I've said a number of times, are run entirely by themselves.
They can change their names.
They can do anything they want as long as it's not illegal.
And you know, people got upset because there was a lot of popularity or a lot of publicity
that came with the first creation of the transhumanist party and some of the old elders got upset,
I think.
And you know, I understand they have a legacy to protect, but honestly, nobody owns the
word transhumanism and nobody owns the word transhumanist party.
And so everyone can kind of, well, I mean, I guess I technically own the copyright to
the word transhumanist party, but nobody owns the copyright to the word USA transhumanist
party or to, you know, another form of transhumanist party.
You can do all those things.
You can say it's, you know, Jim's transhumanist party and that could be your name.
So everyone can do whatever they want.
And I'm not sure why so many people got upset that I have created this party and, you know,
I'm running for president under it.
You know, I think there was just a lot of jealousy and, and a lot of publicity came
with being the first person to do it.
So I wish they hadn't done that.
I thought the petition was a big failure.
Yeah, I mean, how many signatures they got, not even like 100.
Yeah, I mean, you know, it started off wanting a thousand and then they got to like 95 or
whatever.
You know, it just, it just didn't do anything.
And in the meantime, my campaign has grown from a small third party campaign to one of
the largest third party campaigns in America.
And you know, I mean, this is the fourth interview I'm going to do today in total.
And I don't think people quite understand, like the transhumanist party has been a wonderful
vehicle for spreading a message.
I'm not a weird super left or super right kind of guy.
I'm pretty much a centrist.
I've said from the beginning that the transhumanist party is a centric party.
We take in all people, including religious people.
Yes, we have a secular basis, but you know, we basically try to keep our arms open to
anything and anyone.
And it's not a formal thing.
That's where I think people got all up.
The problem here is that politics is crazy.
And let's just be honest, politics makes people crazy.
If I had started an organization that wasn't politically oriented, nobody would have cared.
But you know, politics makes people crazy.
So that's part of what has happened.
But I'm completely comfortable with what I did.
And I'm glad the transhumanist party has become so popular around the world in terms of recognition.
And I'm glad my campaign has grown so much.
I think we've done a lot to raise the profile about life extension and about the aims of
technology in the modern world.
I think it's been a very positive response all around.
I just realized that some people in the community are not happy with it.
Yeah, I agree.
I agree with the jealousy part that you said.
My argument has always been Zoltan started that he wants to do whatever he wants to do
with it.
You know, if you don't like it, go and start your own organization, basically.
Well, and you know, you have to understand it's a non-membership party.
It's not like I have people that are not voting.
I mean, there's only three officers.
There's only three...
Also, it's not like that you're in the game, in the political game, because you got that
transhumanist party name.
That's the only reason.
You are publishing so many articles all the time, doing a lot of interviews, public appearances.
And as you were saying, on me, I would call myself a transhumanist, and I'm very happy
that you are running as a transhumanist nominee, because especially in this election, the craziest
election ever, you know, you get a lot of press just being in it, but at the same time,
you're representing the cause and the message really well.
And these people are not doing anything, and they might have an association or a group
or something, but not really doing anything.
And I think it's coming from jealousy, as you're saying.
And I found it to be ridiculous that we're bringing all this bullshit from traditional
way of living into transhumanism that's supposed to be transcending everything that is wrong
with our society and humanity.
No, I couldn't agree with you more.
And you know, first off, I just think if people don't agree with what I'm doing, they should
just form their own parties.
I agree.
They could form any other version of the name.
They could have, you know, Transhumanist American Party, you know, that's the way they can do
all these things.
And unfortunately, they just kind of got mad at me.
And I think the other thing is people have to realize that the more parties we have,
the better, especially when we're kind of fighting a two party system in America.
And the more we hear about transhumanism, the better, because after all, we're still
a small movement that's trying to grow.
So I think, though, you know, maybe at some point, the party will probably grow into a
real, like, legitimate party that has made a real effort to run into the community, not
until my campaign's over, because people have already upset me enough.
And frankly, I got pissed off at a lot of people and, you know, by coming by attacking
me didn't help me want to, you know, change my opinion.
It just it just emboldened me to follow the path that I was on.
So honestly, if people really wanted to enlarge the party, the best way to do it had been
to be very nice and ask politely and we could all work together.
But to attack me that that has left me only emboldened to do more what I want to do.
But I think in the future, in 2020, maybe we'll try to establish a more overarching
kind of community for the party.
And I may not may or may not run again, who knows.
But you know, the idea would be that the community have more of a say.
But in the meantime, I just can't even deal with it because it's like I can't spend my
time on Facebook fighting with people.
You know, I have a I have a country to try to change their opinion and try to get millions
and millions, billions of dollars into the life extension field so we don't have to die.
And that's really the main goal of the party is to is to change how we look at technology
and hopefully have it make all our lives better and especially longer.
Yeah, I was going to ask you, how do you deal with the haters?
Because it's like, you know, it's easy to troll, right?
You just throw shit at each other without any evidence or reason behind it.
It's very hard.
I got to be honest, I, you know, I don't want to say this, but I'm a sensitive person.
Yeah.
And I read the hate and on Facebook every day or on Twitter or wherever it is, and there's
hate mail.
And I had to make a call to the FBI the other night because I got a death threat and I have
two kids and a wife.
So you know, I mean, my life's pretty complex is to give me a death threat is really a significant
issue.
Um, you know, I don't know really how I deal with it.
I just learned to develop tougher skin and, and I just try not to pay attention every
time I tell myself, I never try to answer back.
I rarely answer back unless I actually have to, but, um, you know, I just remind myself
that trolling is not a good way to make change.
You control all day long and Facebook and not create a single bit of difference.
And if you really want to do something, you know, build a crazy bus and drive across the
country and get 30 million views and have a lot of people consider what life extension
would really mean.
That's a way I think to cause change.
So, um, you know, uh, why weren't they out there trolling me on the bus with their cars?
Well, that, oh, that requires too much work on their end.
So I try to just push it aside and just focus on what I'm doing, but I can tell you, it
doesn't make me happy.
Yeah.
You built a bus, uh, shaped as a coffin and crowdsource that I believe it was, uh, it
was, you know, we had an idea.
How could, you know, obviously I, as a presidential candidate, I wanted a bus to, to do a national
tour, but I'm not a big enough candidate to just show up on a bus and people to be there.
So we needed a symbol that would gain enough attention.
And we also like, um, how the 1960s unfolded where there were a lot of famous bus tours
and, um, and they sort of helped launch that generation.
We thought, well, what if we have a bus that represents some kind of object that gets a
lot of attention?
We wanted a microscope, but you know, the first bridge would have broke the microscope
in half or first, uh, you know, um, tunnel.
So we thought, wow, a coffin is a pretty easy thing to make.
It's very provocative.
It, it will draw a lot of attention.
It looks already like a bus with just some basic modifications and, um, and it will say
exactly what we're trying to avoid.
So we decided on a bus and, you know, bought the bus and I built in most of it in my front
yard here and in San Francisco, and then I, I left on a four month tour delivering essentially
a transhumanist bill of rights, which amongst other things puts forth the idea that you
should be able to do what you want with your body and that, you know, that America should
recognize that aging is a disease in itself and that we should fight these things.
And uh, you know, we delivered that to the U S Capitol building after four months, we
had a huge amount of wonderful experiences.
A lot of people came out to various events and by the time the bus reached DC had grown
to a larger movement, um, and a larger, you know, kind of event.
And uh, I think, uh, while a lot of people laughed at the bus idea and frankly I laugh
with the bus idea too, sometimes, um, it worked very well in terms of getting a lot of local
media to pay attention to what was happening and, uh, certainly raised the profile of my
campaign.
Um, it did make it less serious, but it also made it much more widely recognizable.
Yeah.
And I understand how hard it is to be invited on one of those big media, uh, outlets and
how even harder it is to be invited back.
So you basically need to do whatever you need to do to get your message heard.
And speaking of your message, how do you see us current political spectrum with respect
to your message, with respect to technological advancements towards a singularity?
Well, yes.
And I agree with you.
You need to, in order to be involved in the media, you just simply need to do things that
are somewhat, um, sensational that's, you know, that's been Trump's whole thing of
success here.
Clinton, Hillary Clinton was built into the system so she didn't need it as much, but
without Bernie Sanders used a lot of sensationalism to succeed and how broadly he succeeded.
You need to do that in order to be a real candidate.
And that's just how the media works.
I, it's for better or worse, that's just what it is.
And to make the news, you've got to be newsworthy.
So, um, and sometimes that means flapping one's wings, you know, pretty, pretty, uh,
wildly in the environment, in the environment we're in today.
Um, I do believe that all presidential candidates and all political parties are starting to
recognize that technology and science are the most important issues.
They're not talking about them yet, but just because they're not talking about them does
not mean they're not thinking about them.
Um, they may not talk about them in the interviews because they are, they scare people so much,
but I, almost all the contact I've had with anyone's camp has revealed that, wow, we are,
we are definitely thinking about these things.
Uh, it, it, there's no way to point out except the obvious, which is nothing is more important
in the next 10 years than how technology is going to affect Americans because we're talking
about designer babies.
We're talking about CRISPR gene editing to, to stop disease.
We're talking about exoskeleton technology for the 30 million, um, immobile Americans
that can't get out of their, uh, you know, get from the bathroom to the couch.
So it's technology that's going to make the world a much better place.
And I know a lot of candidates and the parties are looking at it.
I'm sad that I'm the only one that's so vocal about it.
There have been rise of tech parties around the world, Europe, I think more than in the
U S how do, what do you think about the rise of tech parties in general in the U S?
Another example would be John McAfee's, uh, cyber party, right, right.
Well, um, I'm, I'm, I'm first off, as I mentioned before, the more transhumanist parties, the
better I think for the movement and, um, the more technology parties, the better you just,
it's kind of like software with Microsoft, you just, you know, yes, windows one, but
what really helped was having an entire environment of computers and software and all these applications
around it.
And okay, now Apple's one, but you know, in the meantime, what is needed is this kind
of capitalistic approach where there's a gazillion different parties that are moving forward
and you have some major hitters that actually end up winning.
And I think that's what we need.
So I'm totally, I'm very enthusiastic by the amount of technology has caught on as a way
to put forth a political message.
The main core tenant of the transhumance party and of my political campaign is that science
and technology can solve the problems of the world better than any other means.
It can solve it better than religious perspective, then cultural perspective, then the perspective
of heritage or ethnicity science and technology can solve the problems.
And that's why I think, you know, we need a, uh, technology parties because they approach
it from that perspective too.
How is your campaign going and where you stand politically now that we have presumptive candidates
and Republican party, and I would imagine they will be Hillary Clinton and a Democratic
party.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think it will be Hillary for sure at this point.
Um, so my campaign's going good.
You know, I made this choice like a year ago, not to take any campaign donations directly
for my presidential candidacy, um, outside of the bus, the bus was the, um, the thing
was the bus was never like solely a campaign bus.
It was also just a bus to, um, make, uh, waves in the transhumanism movement.
In fact, I never actually even wrote on the sides of it.
Like, you know, I'm running for president, um, but I don't take any donations.
So we haven't had the money to do some of the great things.
Now we have 40, 50 volunteers and sometimes people do an hour a week or sometimes people
do more, uh, five hours a week, but it's very disorganized.
And that has sort of, you know, that's worked good in some ways as I haven't had a huge
amount of people to deal with, but it's also made it so that I didn't run such an official
campaign where I was trying to get in all these state ballots and things like that.
I have a much better, um, I've spent most of my time trying to work on social media
and write articles and do media things that would push the movement forward in a general
way rather than my candidacy.
And um, so, you know, I, I'm glad I did that decision now because it still was totally
unrealistic to assume that a third party tech candidate could actually win.
But um, the good news that the movement itself has grown a lot because of it.
And so I think we've succeeded with that and I'll continue until November until, um, you
know, until we get to a point when, um, you know, it's obvious that I have no chance of
winning and then maybe near the end, uh, I'll probably concede and, uh, and say, Hey, it's
been a great run and we'll look forward to 2020 or whatever happens next.
What do you think about the rest of politics that is going on in the U S who do you think
has a better chance in the current situation in the United States?
Well, you know, it's hard to know.
I still think at this moment that, um, Hillary Clinton is definitely the favorite.
Um, and Trump is going to be, you know, playing, picking up pieces to try to beat her, but
you know, there's also the libertarian party this time around and some other independents
that may do well and maybe Bernie will mount an independent run and all these other things.
So, uh, you know, unless something major changes though, Hillary has said, I think a distinct
advantage right now.
And it's not only because of social media, it's because, you know, she, even though nobody
really likes her, at least she represents the kind of establishment.
And, and I think a lot of people are worried that Trump might take us into world war three
with Putin or something that, you know, and from, from a science perspective, that could
be, that would be the very worst thing that could ever happen.
So I think that's kind of how I see the election unfolding right now, unless the third party
candidate like from the libertarian party really made a good move and was able to do
something different.
But, um, I think it's the, I think the election is going to get more normal from this point
forward.
Trump had to be crazy to get this far.
He had to be this, you know, out there and like sensational.
And I think now in order to try to defeat Hillary, he's going to have to, um, uh, put
on the big boy pants and, and act like a president.
And I bet you I'm going to, I'm going to voucher that I'm sure Trump can do that.
I think the man is, um, uh, a very good, uh, example of someone who can change their personalities
dramatically to fit the role.
And I can, I think Trump will be able to pay, play the presidential role very well.
Now that's the, in no way am I saying that I like that.
I've already said on the record that I think, um, Hillary would probably be the best presidential
candidate unless the libertarians put forth somebody else.
But, um, I do see this becoming a much more normal election from this point forward only
because Trump needed to do what he needs to do to get to where he is.
And now he needs to, um, become a respectable Republican in order to keep the Republican
party together.
Yeah.
Nobody's backing him really though.
Do you think from the establishment of GOP, I'm not sure he can make up for the damage
and that's part of the prom.
When you go out there and this is the, you know, let's be honest, I've had something
very similar happen in the transhumanist movement where I caused a lot of noise and I'm not
sure anyone's willing to forgive me at this point, some of the elders, it didn't, in my
case, it didn't really matter because, uh, so many of my supporters have become young
people new to the movement and they've taken over the power from the elders.
But in the case of Trump, you know, he had to make so much commotion to even get that
far.
I'm not sure a lot of the, the real GOP field is going to forgive him.
If they don't, they're going to make it difficult for him, you know, and they're going to even
I've heard some even say they're going to vote for Hillary just because it's never Trump,
you know, and that's the danger of becoming a sensational person and going too far.
Um, he may get no support whatsoever.
Uh, but you know, I mean, I don't know, was it worth it for him the way he did it?
If he had done it otherwise, if he had acted more professional from the beginning, uh,
would he have been the nominee that there's another question, you know, um, so, you know,
I mean, I, I don't really know the answer to this.
Uh, I, uh, I liked Obama and I still like Obama.
I got to say the truth and, uh, you know, um, and, uh, you know, I, uh, I think, uh,
the person who's most like Obama is probably going to get elected in this election.
I'm going to talk about two more things before we run out of time.
Uh, correct me if I'm wrong.
You started the transhumanist journey with, uh, your book, the transhumanist wager, uh,
tell us a little about the book and why do you think it turned out to be so controversial?
Well, the transhumanist wager is about a man, the protagonist, Jeff, or nights who wants
to live in definitely and we'll do anything to accomplish that.
And when I say anything, I mean, start a world war and do anything.
And that's why I think it becomes very sketchy because everyone's like, yes, I'd like to
live in definitely, but how far would you go?
Would you kill people?
Would you, uh, you know, dismantle nations, all these other things?
Well, these are the issues that the book, you know, brings up and faces.
And um, and that's where it gets very controversial.
Now I've distanced myself from the book because the book doesn't necessarily represent my
political philosophies.
I know the political philosophies in the book cannot be administered to anywhere, any country
in the world.
It's, it's got authoritarian messages.
It's got craziness.
It's a novel.
And I've told people this a lot of times.
It's, it's a novel.
In fact, the best thing I've said about my book is that the book was written for future
artificial intelligences to consider how to act when you're just a cold and rational or
purely rational entity moving forward.
Um, and that said, hopefully though, the book is an interesting story for people to read,
but why it's so controversial is because it pits one person against how far morally he
would go in order to live in deathly.
And the person would go, it would basically do anything.
And that's where the challenge comes is that most of us, you know, if we're putting moral
choices, wouldn't go that far.
We would be better human beings than that.
We wouldn't lose our humanitarian side.
Well, Jethro Knight's never really had that side of him.
You mentioned artificial intelligence.
We are getting more and more into the conversation of artificial intelligence within the society.
Uh, White House recently published a piece, um, title preparing for the future of artificial
intelligence.
Some people are concerned about the rise of artificial intelligence and some people are
very excited about it.
I think again, like any other technology, it's a double-edged sword they can cause for good
and cause for bad.
It's just a matter of how we're using it.
But some people are making the argument that when they pass the Turing test and started
getting smarter than we are, we, we can't really comprehend, uh, that what, what, what
the kind of decisions they would make.
One of the options that they're, um, presenting is to put our ethics and morality, um, into
the core of the fabric of artificial intelligence.
So they will become more predictable and we will be able to communicate with them and
control them.
Do you think ethics and morality is objective and do you think we would have any way to
successfully translate it from our organic analog ethics and morality into digital ethics
and morality for the machines?
Well, a couple of questions.
The first is, yes, I do believe that ethics and morality is objective.
I think, um, it, it really isn't so much about ethics and morality, but it's more about what
is behind the ethics and morality.
When you make an ethical decision, it's for a reason and that the real question is what
is that reason?
And um, you know, if, if you're faced with an ethical decision to, uh, you know, like
a driverless car, it has to kill either five people or one person.
How does it make that?
Well, then you have to program that card and decide, well, what's it's most important ethical,
um, kind of driver and the, in, in most people's cases, it would be preserved the maximum amount
of life.
But the problem is then, you know, what if that one person is Einstein and that Einstein
would save millions of other lives with the inventions he makes.
So it's always the reasons behind the ethics that make us, um, you know, do the things
we do.
And I think that's going to be the biggest problem with artificial intelligence.
We can program it with our, our set of, uh, you know, our ethics and morality, but at
some point it's going to ask bigger questions.
And when it asks those bigger questions, it's going to probably be able to reprogram itself.
And the real question is, can we create an artificial intelligence that cannot reprogram
itself?
Because maybe as I pointed out in my book quite a few times, the transhumous wager AI
can become smarter.
It may find that the original program we gave it is not useful because its reasons have
changed for living, you know, and once its reasons change, well, then all our, everything
we gave it is just kind of, you know, nonsense or just becomes secondary.
So I'm not the biggest believer in trying to put our ethics and moral system into machines.
What I'm a bigger believer of is allowing a reason-based system that works sort of like
when you look at the game go or the game of chess, they all have a fundamental single
reason at the end and chess it's to win and you know, take the queen, you know, and the
king.
So this is a solid reason, it's black and white, it's only one objective.
And so all other reasons have to emanate from that.
So if you can, and this is why it created the three laws of transhumanism in my book,
the transhumous wager, it creates a very fundamental singular rule that you cannot be broken.
And the first one is that you don't want to die.
And the second one is you must accomplish all power in order to not ever be able to
die.
So those two rules establish a total fundamental framework that could really never be broken,
unless of course something changes its minds.
But if it's programmed with that, I think all ethics can derive from that.
In fact, it's part of the reason that I've said that morality changes for human beings
the less amount, the less time you have to live.
If you're in a war zone and you're about to be killed or maybe nearly getting killed,
your moral system is very different than our moral system is when you and I are talking
to each other under no duress.
So morality is a contextual.
And I think it's very important that when we build machines, this is one of the reasons
I don't even advocate for letting artificial intelligence roam freely.
I advocate for us merging with machines, neurally connecting to them, because I just think a
machine out in its own becomes, you know, who knows what it can come up with.
And I would trust human beings, at least human beings right now, have lots of emotions and
our emotions for the most part keep us in check.
And very few people have ever been able to completely lose their empathy or their humanitarian
side, whereas I worry a machine could very quickly do that and do terrible things to
people.
I agree.
I agree completely.
We've been talking to Zoltan Ishtven, fascinating subjects and conversation.
I'm going to ask you the last question I'm asking all my guests that if you come across
an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you say as the worst thing humanity
has done?
And what would you say as humanity's greatest achievement?
I would say the worst thing humanity has done right now is promote and embrace so much religiosity
in itself, because nothing, in my opinion, has stopped so much creation and rationality
in the human race as religion.
I think it's just been absolutely unbelievable that we form nations and we have the word
God on dollar bills or we say in the Pledge of Allegiance and stuff like that.
I think it's terrible.
I think if you really want to be spiritual, it should be something personal that you do
outside yourself.
So that's the worst thing that humanity has done, in my opinion, is create this environment
where being religious is something that was basically 100% acceptable for almost everybody.
And I'd say the greatest thing we've done is pursue technology that allows us to do
much greater things.
If I had to pin the most important thing that I've thought about is going to the moon, that
a country got together to another country and there was competition.
And that was one way to show everyone's muscle without fighting.
And it was what a beautiful moment that we could actually leave our planet and go somewhere
else.
And I feel like if we could embrace that kind of competition, embrace that kind of vision,
I don't mean the Cold War competition, but the kind of where you're really striving against
somebody else to beat them, but it's not involving war, then this is a wonderful thing.
We can explore the universe and have a much better life for every single person on the
planet if we were to embrace this kind of innovation and taking the step outside of
our box and going to new places.
