People's concept of what's hap- what happy is is like so fucked up.
That's why I have something against happiness.
Hello, and welcome to the third episode of Neo Human Podcast.
I'm Agabahari.
You can follow me on Twitter and Instagram at Agologist.
And you can follow the show on Live in Limbo at liveinlimbo.com.
So for the third episode, I'm here with Kurt Jaimungal, who is a physics and math grad
from University of Toronto, and he is a filmmaker now.
So when did you graduate from a physics and math program?
Like I spent way too long in undergrad.
Why did you choose that field?
I love- I still love physics and math.
When I was a kid, my dad would make me learn math and chess and stuff at like a really
young age.
He would like pressure me and I hated that.
And I didn't like him at a young age because of that because it was like a lot of pressure.
Even I remember I wanted to watch The Simpsons one time.
And so I was playing- he would make me play blindfolded chess with my sister.
So I would be blindfolded.
My sister is allowed to be not blindfolded because she wasn't as good as me.
So I would be blindfolded.
And then I was just making mistakes on purpose because I knew the new Simpsons episode was
coming on and my dad saw this and he physically cut the cable.
And then I went upstairs crying.
I went upstairs crying and my mom woke up and then she's like, Paul.
My dad's like, Paul, what are you doing to the child?
She's like, he's like, Christ, that's my mom's name.
Just yelling at each other.
And then I'm crying in my room and I don't have TV.
I can't do anything.
I just have to sit in the dark.
Yeah, so I was just kind of pressured from a young age to do like analytical things.
Was your dad a- or is your dad an academic?
Oh, well he's a teacher, but of woodworking.
Although he studied chemistry in university.
He just wanted his kids- like, you know, when I was- even my brother- my brother went through
worse than what I did.
So you had two brothers, one sister?
One brother, two sisters.
It's like two boys, two girls.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
And like when I was a kid, it's that classic thing of like the parents say, like, you'll
thank me later.
And I really- I wish that he was harder on me because it really helped me out throughout
the rest of my life.
Oh, yeah?
Because, you know, I was learning- I was learning calculus in grade three.
Like actual calculus and integral calculus, not just regular calculus.
So when you talk about your childhood, would you categorize it as a good or bad childhood?
Good.
I'd say it's pretty good.
I'd say it's pretty good.
Aside from that stuff, I had a pretty good childhood.
Which was bad because it didn't prepare me for like the crappy adulthood.
Was it in Canada?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Everything's in Canada.
Yeah.
In Toronto.
Yeah, in Toronto.
That's awesome.
Born and raised.
Basically born and raised.
But I mean, I came here when I was like two months old or three months old.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then I always liked math and physics.
I always liked math in particular.
And then physics.
I forgot how physics came about.
I think my brother was explaining something to me about quantum fluctuations one time.
This was when Blockbuster was still around.
And then I remember finding that fascinating that particles can come in and out of existence.
Like just like that.
Because all I knew was that you cannot create or destroy anything.
And then he's telling me, no, you can.
It's just in very small time scales you can.
And it happens all the time.
Happening in front of us right now.
It happens in between atoms.
Like anytime there's empty space, that's happening.
And that fascinated me.
I think I just from there, I always looked up like physics.
Yeah, so I always loved physics.
When you say coming in and going out of existence, in existence it's very tangible.
It's understandable.
What is out of existence from the point of view of a person who is passionate about physics
and has studied physics?
Let's say you have empty spaces.
There's nothing in it.
Right.
This is a vacuum is what they call it.
And then so you're looking at this vacuum and there's nothing.
But then what happens is out of this nothing, you'll see an electron and then an anti-electron
appear and then collide.
An anti-electron, whenever antimatter collides with regular matter, matter will destroy itself.
Usually it destroys itself in energy.
So a photon will be emitted.
But in these little anti-particle pairs, they'll come in and out of existence like this constantly.
I'm making a gesture with my hands that no one can see.
Yeah, so there's nothing, they come and then they go like, yeah.
Where are they coming from?
It doesn't mean that they're coming from somewhere, it's just that it's like the laws say that,
okay, you've heard of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, right?
Yes, but say it anyways.
This basically comes from Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, which says you can't simultaneously
measure a particle's position with 100% accuracy and know its momentum with any accuracy.
There's a trade-off between knowing how sure are you of its position and how sure are you
of its momentum.
If you try and measure one with a certain degree of accuracy, it will limit the other's
accuracy.
So people normally kind of say it like, imagine you're playing like billiard balls, I mean,
you're playing pool, and let's say it's dark, okay, so you can't see the balls but you can
only shoot another ball at the ball that you're trying to measure.
You're trying to figure out where is this white ball, let's say, okay?
So the only way you can know is if you interact with it by throwing other balls.
So usually that's photons, we're looking at something, we're interacting with it by looking
at it, right?
Photons are being emitted to it.
So let's say we're trying to find out where this white ball is.
We don't know, the white ball could be moving, it could have momentum, momentum just like
velocity and speed, okay?
It could be moving or it could be still and we don't know where on the board it is, so
we're just shooting.
Let's say we shoot it with the ball.
This is such a bad analogy.
So basically, the harder you hit the white ball, let's say I use my billiard ball to
hit the white ball really hard, okay, and the white ball goes flying off somewhere but
my ball stays right where the white ball was, okay, like I just hit it and then my ball
stays and the white ball goes there, then I'll know like, oh, I have a pretty good idea
of where the position was of that white ball but now I don't know its momentum anymore
because I just changed it.
Whereas before, I could kind of like go very softly to it and let's say the white ball
is moving and I go very softly with my billiard ball to hit it, my billiard ball will move
a little bit and I won't really know its position but that's such a bad analogy.
But anyway, it's like basically, there's a trade-off.
But then here's the thing that most people don't know is that the trade-off doesn't happen
because we suck at observing or there's some human thing.
The trade-off is even the atom itself doesn't know its own momentum and position accurately.
That's what's the interesting thing.
Is this the same thing with when it's being observed, it behaves as a particle and when
it's not observed, it behaves as waves?
No, it behaves as both even when you observe it and when you don't observe it.
What they're saying is it lives in a superposition of like up and down, left and right, all these
things simultaneously until you observe it, then it chooses one.
Right.
That's just an interpretation of quantum mechanics that like that...
The equations kind of imply that but it's just an implication, right?
Like there's many different other implications, different interpretations of what the equations
mean.
All we know is these equations are the most accurate equations in all of science.
They're the most tested of any sort of scientific field even more than cellular biology or whatever.
These equations are correct down to the degree of accuracy of like, let's say you're trying
to measure the earth and your measurement is within a marble, like within a penny's
sort of length of like the radius of the earth.
That's your error.
That's also how accurate we can measure certain things quantum mechanically.
Like of course we just go down to the scale of that.
How long has it been since we developed this?
That's 100 years now.
100 years.
Basically, what I'm understanding from this conversation so far is that physics has attempted
to explain the world and life and the universe and has succeeded in your opinion and maybe
my opinion and in the opinion of a lot of people has succeeded greatly but there is
a huge amount that we still don't know about.
There are things that we don't know that we don't know.
Is physics in general and physics departments around Canada and United States getting the
budget from your point of view because you experienced a university life as well?
Getting the budget that they need to test and prove a lot of these theories in order
to explain more so we can understand more or is there a problem in that department?
No, there's this cool book, this really cool book, the same book that we were listening
to in the car, that towards the end of the book the guy kind of goes on this sort of
rant, which I don't like the end of the book because it's like some sort of he talks about
like we should give women more things and I don't think we should give women more.
I'm just misogynistic.
But then he's like he's talking about how the predominant like if you want to get a
faculty position at any sort of major university for the past 20 years it's basically all been
string theory.
You have to be a string theorist for some reason just and that a lot of that is because
there's already string theorists in power and they're the ones that get to choose whether
or not you.
There's a lot of politics about it.
And he's like advocating we need new ideas and we need to encourage new ideas.
So I would say that that would be like the things just encouraging ideas and it doesn't
have to do with the budget.
It's just like the the and when you say like you have to be a string theorist to be able
to get a good job.
Why would you think about any other thing outside of that box?
That's right.
So it's a sort of systematic change or to just be like to be yeah it's a it's some sort
of systematic change that needs to be done and I don't know how to do that but like or
just go against the system and just just study it on your own time or and don't get paid
for it.
Like yeah.
So if you want to get paid you should be a string theorist is basically the thing.
And my brother my brother he studied string theory so I don't really know anything about
string theory.
He studied it.
He did his PhD in it and and then he went and now he's doing mathematical finance because
he left it because he he didn't like string theory because it was too disconnected from
the real world.
Like it was too like there's so many assumptions that you're just making that just have to
be you're just assuming they're right because the equations kind of look elegant but they're
not really describing a world.
But then string theorists say well we're just not smart enough to sort of figure out the
equations yet.
They will describe our world eventually.
But that's such a big there's like a thousands of people have been working on it now for
like 30 years or 40 years and there's still no like big advancement.
But the equations are so elegant that they're like it must be right.
So he left it because of that.
And now he's starting to go back.
He just told me like just a couple of months ago and he said there's like been so little
advancement in the past 20 like 15 years since he left it.
So little change.
Like even though all these really bright people are working on it like there's no new ideas.
So what is the future of physics?
I don't know.
I'm going to be part of that though but that's secret stuff.
It's secret.
Yeah.
Secret stuff.
Well let's talk about women shouldn't have more things then.
Sure.
Let's talk about women.
Your movie Kurt just finished the movie shooting it and editing it.
And I think it's like 95 percent done overall.
Yeah.
And it will be screened on February 16.
That's right.
Where is it going to be screened?
At TIFF in the evening time.
So Tuesday night.
It's a lovely place.
It's a lovely movie.
It is a lovely movie.
Oh boy.
I can't watch my own movie.
So last the reason why I took a while to get back to you with notes on the stuff is.
Yes.
I'm doing I'm editing the dialogue for the film and he's talking about giving me notes
about the things that a director wants to change.
He directed the film written it and played in it.
Yeah.
And I guess I guess I guess doing a good job everybody.
And when.
So anyway I just like every time I have to watch my film to make notes because you have
to keep watching the revisions keep watching it being like oh the sound is too loud.
This not necessarily your stuff but just like object drops or whatever in the film or this
needs to be paced out differently.
Whatever I dread it so much.
Like I'll procrastinate like crazy like I feel so I feel so embarrassed.
I feel like like like my film sucks really really bad.
I know this this sucks for promotion because like but but just constantly understand the
feeling perfectly.
Yeah.
Like and there's so much dread and like I'd rather do anything else than watch it.
And to the point where I even went at the premiere I didn't even want to watch it like
because I was like it would just embarrass me.
I'm glad people like it because they don't they don't see it the way I'm seeing it like
they don't see the flaws.
But to me also just like I feel like it's just I don't know I keep I keep but you see
I think those are being considered flaws but you because you've already categorized them
as flaws.
A lot of people don't notice them.
A lot of people don't consider them as flaws.
So it just is.
Yeah.
Well yeah.
The reason I'm saying I understand what you're talking about is because I had the same experience
making my first album that my music album that I was playing like a guitar solo for
16 hours for like a week every day.
And I hated everything.
I hated myself.
I hated that music everything to perfect every single part of it and it will never be perfected.
And I'll just learn that you had to or I had to let go at some point and like you know
what this is this is cool.
This is awesome.
I'm going to let it go and then whatever did I learn from that experience I will apply
to my next experience and whatever I learn from that my next experience to the experience
after that.
And that's that's how it happened to me.
What sort of music?
What genre?
That album.
Yeah.
It was instrumental progressive rock jazz fusion.
What is that?
There's so many things.
Like technical things.
Technical.
Is there an example of something that like you're like it's like this that I could.
Do you know Dream Theater?
No.
Yeah.
I know what those individual words mean.
I don't know.
I can't really think of what kind of music you listen to.
I just listen to I listen to Nirvana.
Yeah.
Nirvana.
Our Lady Pea is like the 90s rock.
Yeah.
Basically just those two.
And then I listen to like 1950s.
What kind of 1950s songs?
Easy Living.
Do you know Easy Living?
No.
Billie Holiday?
Yeah.
Okay.
So stuff like that.
Like I also like this song is like oh I'm the type of guy who never settles down for
pretty girls.
You know that song?
Is it Elvis Presley?
Oh it sounds like it.
I forget what his name is.
I'm a wanderer.
Yeah I'm a wanderer.
I roam around around.
Do you know this song?
No.
Okay.
So just I don't know.
I get it from Fallout because Fallout the video game is like all sort of 1950s songs
and I just liked it from that.
So I don't listen to it.
I actually don't listen to music.
This is something like most people don't realize or think is weird about me.
I never listen to music for enjoyment.
I just never, I don't have music downloaded on my computer.
My car speakers have never had music played out of them unless other people are hooking
up their phones to it or whatever.
I just, I don't listen to music for pleasure.
On the set of the film, whenever that we were not shooting, Kurt was singing Nirvana songs
with Kurt Cobain voice and some people liked it, some people didn't like it I guess.
Who didn't like it?
I don't know.
I heard a couple of times that you were asked to shut the fuck up.
I don't recall that at all.
I recall people being happy and delighted and asking for more.
What is about Nirvana?
Just the song structure or you can relate to the lyrics?
I don't know.
Not the lyrics.
I like, this is the same reason I like Our Lady Peace.
I like the melody.
I love sort of, I love melody in music a lot which is why I like, I actually kind of like
Lady Gaga's, this cool Lady Gaga song, Bad Romance and I like the part where he goes
da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da.
That's my favorite part of the song.
I really, really like that part but it's like weird to like a Lady Gaga song like if you're
just...
It's so weird.
I like Lady Gaga songs.
Yeah, it's not weird.
Thank you.
Yeah, so I just like melody so much and I think it's melody.
I think that's all it is.
Like the Nirvana songs are very melodic and then Our Lady Peace's songs are melodic and
I was listening and people are like, yeah, you should like Pearl Jam and stuff then if
you like Nirvana.
Pearl Jam stuff is not like melodic like Nirvana.
It's weird and then, and I don't like when people do like, I don't know, these weird
things with their, they go like, yeah, like stuff like that.
Like that's not melodic and then to me that's not melodic.
It's like more like sort of a vocal prowess, like showing your vocal prowess like Beyonce
would or something like that.
Right, show off.
Yeah, but that's fine.
Some people like that but I like the melody and that's not that melodic to me.
Like if he did that in a melodic way, I might like it but yeah and I think that's why I
like it.
Another thing that I, another great book that I've been reading recently is called You're
Not So Smart.
Have you heard of it?
You're Not So Smart, no.
It's a great, great book.
It's like, and each chapter is really short.
It has like 60 chapters and one of those chapters talks about you, it basically goes through
all sort of psychological biases you have as a human, psychological deficiencies, all
these things.
All these things, you think you're a rational person but here's why you're so irrational,
like more irrational than you think and then they were talking about-
Who's it by you now?
I don't know.
Then they were talking about what you think, they start off the chapter with like how you
think you are and this is how you are.
Like it's like you think you are, you have reasons for liking everything you do and you'll
even list reasons but the truth is you don't, those reasons are in your subconscious and
you don't have access to them and they are completely unrelated to what you think they
are.
So maybe these reasons I'm saying I like Nirvana are completely like BS, like I'm just making
them up but I don't know I'm making them up.
He's saying like giving examples like you think you like the song because you might
say well I like the drums and blah blah blah but it turns out you like it because when
you were a kid you watched this movie that had that and it was your favorite movie for
whatever other reason and the ending soundtrack sounds similar to that and so years later
you like that song.
I agree absolutely, yeah.
I think everything is like a domino, it's like one thing and this is like since the
beginning of everything, if it's Big Bang, yeah exactly.
So I actually don't think we have any free will in a sense that we can make a decision.
First of all I think all possibilities exist like whatever decision we want to make the
result of that is predetermined but we are just choosing like pathos.
What do you mean by that?
I mean I'm gonna go out of the house and then I get to a street that I can turn left or
right.
If I turn left series of things will happen like bird will fly over, wind will blow that
leaf, a car will pass by.
If I go right different things will happen.
What I'm saying is that left and right is already predetermined but I'm choosing if
I'm going left or right.
That's as much free will as I have.
Oh I see what you're saying.
That's my understanding.
What do you think?
I don't even believe that.
I believe in the gist of what you're saying.
So I do believe we don't have free will.
The universe is not deterministic, it can't be, which I can explain why, because of quantum
mechanics, just because of quantum mechanics, because of randomness.
So it's not determined but that doesn't have anything to do with free will.
Maybe it doesn't.
I'm not saying it's determined in a sense that...
Like from the single moment of Big Bang we can determine all future events.
Yes.
But all possibilities exist.
That's what I think.
What do you mean by that?
It means that everything that can happen, like alternate universes.
If I'm turning left here, one of me in one alternate universe will turn right.
You believe in the multiverse.
I don't know if multiverse will explain that.
Multiverse is the only thing that I can explain this what I think with now.
Okay.
Yeah.
I think everything exists and we are just taking different paths.
That path already exists but it's not predetermined that we're going to take that path.
Interesting.
Okay.
That decision that we're making at that point is a reaction to another action which by itself
is a reaction to another action.
Yeah.
I agree with that.
And I don't even think it's only about us and like me and you, we're talking and we
are affecting each other's train of thought.
Yeah.
We are also affected by the elements.
So everything is like this.
So we just have to write it and observe and understand things.
I think more and more to understand that everything is connected, we're just going with the flow
is like a drop in the ocean.
That's what I think.
You ever hear this thing about the only thing you can know for sure is that you're the only
thing that's conscious or whatever?
Right.
That to me, that is one of the dumbest things I've ever heard and they'll tell you why.
Yeah.
It's true but then why, if that was true and I was the only conscious thing or that person
who wrote it was the only conscious thing and she or he, I think it's a she just because
my hatred for this person.
So she wrote this thing.
Why would you even write it?
Why would you spend the tens and hundreds of hours to write this whole thesis statement
about why you are the only one that really exists or that you can know for sure exists?
If you really believe that, why bother?
Why not just not do anything or murder people?
Obviously it's not true.
If you ask anybody who knows that, they would say or they would just say they don't believe
that because otherwise you would live your life completely differently if you really
thought that was true.
I know theoretically or whatever if you're talking about like in terms of experience,
you can only talk about your own experience.
Like that's the only thing you could say is true.
Everybody else could be a robot but it's just one of the dumbest sort of arguments that
someone makes that's trying to sound intellectual.
Like I just hate that argument so much.
It's just if it was true, why would you do it?
Why would you even say it?
Like what's the point of even doing anything?
I don't know if there is any point overall.
The point is probably to not die of hunger and be somewhere warm, you know?
But then we have imagination and we have the tool to make it happen so we make things.
But what I'm saying is that we don't have any control over decisions individually because...
So let's say that thing was true, that thing that conscious being thing was true.
Like you only know that you're the only conscious being.
So then if it's true, then that means that I'm the only conscious being because right
now I'm the only one experiencing myself right now.
So I feel like I'm the only one that's living, really.
Well they really say in a conversation between two people, there are multiple of us exist.
One of me is who I think I am.
One of me is who you think I am.
Which is completely different from me, but that's how you categorize aga in your mind.
And one version is who I really am.
Who are you aga?
You tell me.
You just made this argument about how I can't, that there is an alternate aga.
I think there is alternate of everything.
Who you think you are.
Let's probe into this one particular alternate thing.
Who are you?
What's something about you that I don't know?
Nothing like trivial, like you like orange socks or something strange.
I don't give a fuck about overall.
I think it just, you make things and you make you enjoy the result for most people, but
the point is to be able to enjoy the process of making them.
Do you ever have regret?
Huh?
Do you ever have regret?
I don't believe in regret.
I don't think it's logical.
I know, but we're just, you know, irrational or logical beings, so I want to know if you
can...
Well, we don't have to.
We don't have to be irrational or logical.
Oh, but you're not so smart books, Differ is, begs to differ.
You should read that book, it's a great book by the way.
Anyway, so obviously like I don't believe in a, like there's lots of things you can
logically know.
I think regret comes from judging a event in the past with our present knowledge and
wisdom and in hindsight.
But I can also equally say that the opposite of regret, which is like, um, whatever acceptance
maybe, if regret is irrational, why is acceptance not irrational?
That is also irrational.
So what, what is the most, what do you do?
How do you, what do you do?
Do you just sit there in the state of like, of just like, just, you just...
No, because I have to survive.
That's the thing.
I have to survive.
I have to eat.
I have to drink water.
But my point is, it's very Buddhist, I guess, is like that I should be fine with being in
that room that you're saying completely empty or being in, in the middle of, you know, a
palace.
Like, I knew I'm limited to pretty much one room, doesn't matter where I live because
that's how I grew up.
What do you mean?
I was always in my room.
Oh, this was just a metaphoric, I was just joking.
I didn't literally mean, are you going to be in a room?
You could be.
And I could be.
So when you say like, you know...
But what I'm saying is that we are, we, there is nothing objective about what we're experiencing.
It's a complete subjective experience.
So the reality that you're experiencing is a very different reality than I'm experiencing
everybody else's.
Yeah.
No, but what I'm, I agree with that, but what I'm talking about is like, you said you don't
give a fuck, which I believe you, but I want to know, so you don't really, I want to know
if you experience regret.
I know you don't think it's rational, but that's a different thing entirely.
Whether or not you experience regret or whether or not you think...
Sometimes I do.
Yeah.
So you give, you basically, you do give a fuck, but just way less than most people.
I think it's just a matter of discipline and practice to get to a point that you can't
change your past and you're building your future right now.
So the best thing to do is to focus on right now, whatever it is that's happening.
So for me, I want to be the most observant and present in the moment that I can be to
experience that.
Does that, and does that bring you happiness?
What is happiness?
No, that's, that's why I'm asking you like...
Well, you should define happiness.
What do you define happiness as?
I define happiness as healthy, being healthy, being fulfilled and being successful.
Okay.
But...
Let's get rid of the successful part.
Let's say...
Successful, it doesn't necessarily relate to money.
No, I know.
Material success.
No, of course, of course.
But I, so let's say the fulfillment thing.
So do you feel...
All right, fine.
Put in successful.
Do you feel happy?
You're whatever your definition of happy is.
Fuck yeah.
I think I'm the fucking luckiest person that I know.
Good.
And I'm an atheist.
So I don't have God to thank to.
And I found out that saying thank you universe is also that fucking same bullshit.
Yeah, who says thank you universe?
Some people do.
They want to replace God with something else, but it's the same fucking nonsense.
So I'm just happy.
There's this girl on my Facebook feed that like, I just, I met her at Starbucks.
She, I don't know, she looked like a normal person.
And then, and then we just exchanged Facebook contact.
And I see her, the stuff that she posts on Facebook, it's all, she's always like, she
puts these vlogs that like three people see, but she talks like she's, she acts like she's
talking to like thousands or she has like a cult following.
She's like, she's like, Hey everybody.
Oh my God.
It's such a beautiful day.
Don't you just like shut your mouth.
And she, and she talks about like, like you should like go on a cleanse.
Like I just went on a, a yoga retreat.
Who goes fuck you on a fucking yoga retreat.
I hate her so much.
And I keep her as my friend because it aggravates me sometimes like, you know, some people,
they go to Reddit, like they browse R funny, R slash funny or whatever, to like make themselves
feel good.
Sometimes I'll, I'll browse things to make myself feel bad just cause I'm a weirdo.
And so, so whenever I want to feel like hatred, I'll just, I'll look at her Facebook feed.
It's like all about like, there's, there's toxins in like, like in like the, like the
government is, is a toxin, not, not that that's actually like another thing.
The government puts toxins in your, just like, oh, fucking bullshit.
Well, people are looking for a purpose now.
It's bullshit purpose.
Yeah, but she's, she just sucks as a person.
A lot of people did.
Yeah, but she in particular, she broadcasts it.
She broadcasts it with such confidence and such sincerity to convince herself that she's
a good person.
No, she, she's already done that.
She's done that a long time ago.
And she also has like really like, she's also not even that fit, but she keeps talking about
how she's so fit.
She needs to lose some weight.
She needs to like you, like she needs to, she's, she's not a good person.
She bothers me so much.
I wish I could say her name.
I once posted something, oh, oh, oh, she also, we just never, I just added her and then we
never talked, right?
So she doesn't even know who I am anymore because it's been so long, right?
Why did you add her as a first place?
This was like two years ago.
But why?
Why?
I don't know.
I was just adding everybody at that time.
No, I was not, not everybody.
I was just adding, cause she was a woman, she was a girl.
So I was like, okay, maybe I could sleep with her.
Yeah.
Did you?
No.
I'm at her vagina is probably like, probably like she probably doesn't, I don't know.
She probably does weird things to it with like.
Like what?
It's like one of those things that you take where you dilute it in water so many times.
What's that thing?
What's that thing called?
Where you dilute it in water and then homeopathic, she probably does homeopathic solutions for
her real yeast infection and it's just not going away.
She's like, no, it's working.
I can feel it.
Is this a, is this a hatred towards women or you're just very critical of them?
Cause it's kind of a pattern that can be also seen in your film.
Oh, seriously?
Yeah.
So, well, tell me this first, is your film, how would you categorize that?
Is comedy, philosophical, romantic?
Oh, very interesting.
So, so there's so much, something that's really, something that I wanted to do is like, whatever
I write, I write it for, I want it to be like the best thing that I could possibly write
at the time and I'm not going to dumb it down for anybody.
So there's a lot of stuff in there that's like sort of weird and esoteric and it's like,
also then, then I also, here's another thing.
Just like that girl where she has three followers, but she acts like she has a thousand, I'm
criticizing her, but I kind of do the same thing with my film.
Like I, I, I put so many things in there that you really have to be so observant to realize.
Like you have to watch the film three times to be like, oh, that sentence means this.
Oh, that implies there's another layer underneath.
And then, and then I put like, for those people that figure that out, for the hardcore fans,
like you can be like, oh, there's another layer underneath that.
And then, and then even one more that like no one will figure out until like ask them
one specific question, like, oh, well, why do you think this character did this?
And then they'd be like, holy shit.
And then they inspire you to start writing.
What did you get inspired to get into movies?
I used to do standup and it was just, I just wanted to do something like, you know, everybody
wants to do movies.
Everybody like, everybody says that, oh, I have a story or whatever they, so it's like
in our culture to just like want to do movies and I was already doing standup.
So then I was like, okay, I can write it.
Then I, the real story is like I made a script for Comedy Central when I just did one performance.
All I did was one performance on stage and I did pretty good.
And I just thought it was like the best.
So I wrote a script for Comedy Central after one performance on stage and it sucked so
bad and they rejected it.
And then I was just like, I just, instead of me being like, fuck, what the fuck, man,
I suck.
Instead of me being like that, which I normally would, I don't know why it wasn't, I was just
like, who are they to reject my amazing script?
I was like, such overconfidence about it.
And the script, by the way-
How long ago was that?
This was like when I was 18.
How old are you now?
27.
So nine years ago, yeah.
So then I just like learned, I was like, fine, I'll make my own script, learned to use a
camera.
Then I wanted to get a director and no one would direct it, like I didn't know how to
get a director.
I'm like, fine, I'll learn to direct.
I'll be my own director.
Wanted to get someone to edit.
I'm like, no one will.
Fine, I'll learn to edit it myself.
Then it just kind of went that way of like people saying no, then I was like, fine, I'll
do it anyway.
And then so it just kind of came about from doing a bunch of those little comedy things
or little-
It's awesome.
Videos, yeah.
Is this story based on something that happened to you personally?
All of it is like, almost all of it is real.
Yeah, very, very little of it is not real.
Like almost everything is a storyline that really happened, except obviously Japiness,
which is a story that there's no real, there's a story in the film, the character gets, wants
to make a story for Japanese people and then he's-
It's not racist, it's cultural awareness.
Yeah.
And then it's just-
It's pretty good.
Yeah, then that's fake, obviously.
You were influenced by Larry David, clearly.
Yeah.
Did he yell into you or no?
Not really, but someone said that, someone said Wes Anderson, which I really disagree
with.
I don't even like Wes Anderson.
I watched his films like once each, not even twice.
Which ones did you watch?
So I watched Bottle Rocket, which I think is the one that I like the most.
And I really, oh, I like Mr. The Fantastic Fox, something like that.
I really like that one.
And then the rest I don't really like, like Darjeeling Unlimited or whatever.
Oh no, I love that film.
Yeah, so I didn't really like it, but then what else?
His most recent ones I didn't like, the past three, Hotels, no the Hotel Chavalier was
a short film I think.
Yeah, that's a short film.
That one I really totally liked though, that one I liked, and that wasn't comedic at all.
Yeah.
Yeah, so it was strange that people said it was Wes Anderson, it's only because I love
like straight-ons of people.
I love straight-ons, and just for people who aren't into film, that just means you film
a character straight-on and not at an angle, like they're looking almost at the barrel
of the lens.
I love that.
And I guess Wes Anderson does that too, so that's pretty much the only, maybe Whip Pans.
Maybe that and Whip Pans is the, but for me, I wrote that in the script, like I wasn't
even thinking Wes Anderson, I just, that was just a better scene transition than a cut.
It just, it flowed better.
Like I could see it while I was writing it, that if it was a cut, it would be 5% different
in terms of the emotion that I wanted to evoke.
So I was like, okay, I can make it.
How do you define people, like actors especially?
Mandy.
Just Mandy, that's it.
A little bit through this website called My Goalio, which is this new website.
And then you went by faces for actors or did they audition for it and you were like, okay,
not you, not you, not you, you, yes.
Yeah.
It was like Tinder.
It was like swiping on Tinder, especially for the women, because there's, but not because
I'm just going for who looks good.
I'm just going for like who looks like the role that I, like you have to, first, the
first filter is you have to look like the person that I want you to look like.
And then the second thing is like, then you have to act it.
So I could eliminate a lot of the people just by like swiping left or archiving or whatever.
Yeah.
And same with the guys too.
How long was the process?
Pre-production started two weeks before production, like it was so hectic, man.
And we were doing pre-production while we're doing production too.
In fact, the guy who played the lead role, Hanny, the second lead, it was going to be
someone completely different than his schedule changed.
And he was the most ideal person.
And then he was quoting me some crazy amount of money that he wanted.
And then it was like just per day, even if it was one hour, but it was a crazy amount,
like more money than my cinematographer is being paid, more money than like even my cinematographer
and producer together are being paid.
And he's not even that good.
He's not like, I don't know why he wanted that.
I think he was doing that as a way to get out, but whatever.
So I couldn't get him.
And then he wouldn't even guarantee me dates.
So I'm like, I was thinking like, if I'm going to pay you that much, you better say that
you're free on the dates that I want you to be free if I'm telling you in advance.
And he's like, no, I can't do those dates.
But anyway, so then we got Hanny, the guy who played his name, Sean Ray, and this is
not good.
Sean Ray wouldn't want to hear this, but like he was like our, we were just like, I personally
was like, fuck it, fine.
We'll just get this guy.
Like seriously, I feel so bad.
He did a really good job though.
No, he did a great job, but like at the time when I watched his audition, I was watching
a bunch of auditions.
The whole theme of the script, the whole theme of the movie after a while became fuck it,
whatever.
Like for every little decision, like certain things would start to go wrong and or like
you just never ideal, then you just say fuck it, whatever, just move on.
Even to this, to the supporting lead, like we're watching the auditions, he, he sucked
the least.
I was like, ah, fuck it, we'll just cast him.
So we got him to come in.
I told him it was an audition and it was, but we set up lights and everything.
We set up the whole scene with the fog machine, with the labs, with everything so that we
could film it at the same time so that if it did work, we could put it in the film.
And then that scene ended up going in the film.
It was the one where he had to ADR because that was one with the dialogue that was the
worst.
Yeah.
But no, he ended up being really good.
I didn't want him to do the accent.
I first, I put that in the script and then I thought the accent was too silly and I didn't
want that in the movie.
But then Khan and Jess and the, and someone else that was there just said like, no, the
accent's good.
The accent's good.
I'm like, whatever.
We did multiple takes with the accent without, for that one scene.
And then I was like, okay, fine, we'll, we'll put the accent in and everybody loved him
a lot.
Yeah.
Like people were surprised he doesn't even have that accent.
No, he's doing a really good job.
Yeah, he's the, he's the best actor.
I'm the worst actor.
And then it goes, I have, I'm pretty bad.
I don't think you're too bad.
I'm like cracking.
I'm like laughing at certain scenes.
It was, it was, I was okay.
Fine.
I was okay.
I was better than the, I don't want to say the other people that weren't that good, but
yeah.
Do you have the second movie planned?
I do.
Yeah.
What's that?
So, so that one's going to be a big, big movie.
I can talk about that later.
I can't talk about things.
It's not that planned.
That's why it's very in its infancy, but it's going to be, it's going to be like, I keep
But it's going to be considered to be one of the greatest movies ever made.
And people are like, oh yeah, sure.
Well, that's good.
You're shamed for that.
That's like how people think it, but I'm, I'm serious.
Like it's going to be that good.
Like we know how there's the standard top 100, which is like Citizen Kane, Godfather,
I don't know, Shawshank maybe.
It's going to be up there.
It's like, it will almost, it's going to be good.
My next one's going to be amazing.
Then my third one, I have that one kind of planned.
That one is not going to be in terms of, it's going to be good.
It's going to be great.
To me, it'll be even better than my second, but it won't be considered by critics and
stuff to be like the top 100, but that one will change people's lives.
Like my third one is like one that will like make you be like, oh, like rethink a lot of
stuff.
That one's, my third one's a very thought provoking one.
Interesting.
Yeah.
Have you started a process of writing a script for both of them at the same time?
No.
I just have the idea for the third one and I kind of have the idea for the second one
that I'm writing still.
Yeah.
You mentioned that you have a special kind of passion for Toronto and you want to do
with Toronto what Woody Allen did with New York.
What makes you so interested in Toronto and are your future movies also going to be in
Toronto and all your movies are going to be in Toronto?
At least the next two, right, because I haven't planned and I have something interesting planned
for how I'm going to do my second one about Toronto.
It's going to almost be like, not CG, but like it's going to be a changed, it's a Toronto
you haven't seen, like a very tweaked Toronto, kind of like her, like slightly futuristic,
but it's not really, it's not a future in this movie.
It's not like a science fiction, so her is like kind of fantasy in the future.
This is not that, but anyway, yeah, it's going to be in Toronto and the reason why, I don't
know, I have an irrational love for Toronto.
It's irrational, just like you're not so smart tells me in the book, but really I have no
reason to love the city that much other than it's the first world country, which is great
and like I always, I constantly tell people, people ask me like, what's something you do
for fun?
And something I love to do is like just walk around downtown at night with just the streetlights
and just everything.
Like I feel, there's like this childlike sort of like, I feel so happy, so like content
and happy and like, and grateful, I'm like, look at all these things we have that everybody's
just walking past and they don't even care about, but like we have like paved, first
of all, we have paved roads and not just like any paved, they're great, they're like normal
roads, they're not like Trinidad roads in my country.
So they're great, we have clean water, anytime we want, we can just get clean water.
We don't even have to, we can go to a store and it's...
Clean water apparently is not the case across Canada, but it is in Toronto definitely.
Sure, okay, so let's say Toronto, yeah.
So that's what I'm saying, like how good we have it here.
So clean water.
Oh, this is like heaven.
It's amazing, like the worst...
Not like heaven, this is heaven.
Like a homeless person here has it better than like the average Nigerian or whatever,
so choose something.
Yeah, like 90% population of the world probably.
Yeah, so it's really cool and people are so, they don't really appreciate it.
It's not that people don't appreciate it, people want more and I think that's what,
it's one of those things of being a human.
This is something that bothers me about that whole 1%, 99% thing, I really hate that whole
movement.
I hate anybody that...
I don't like that movement either.
Anybody that talks about inequality, I could not care, I could not care less about inequality,
I couldn't, because here's my argument for any, about the whole thing.
So if you are part of the 99% and you're just middle class or like, let's say even lower
middle class, okay?
Of course poverty line like, even the poverty line is like okay compared to other countries,
but let's just talk about lower middle class, okay?
You're talking about here.
Yeah, so here in the States, here and the States, okay?
You have it, you are living like royalty lived like a thousand years ago, not royalty but
like the rich lived a thousand years ago, way better than them.
You have cell phones, you have like right angles on streets and like all these, you
have cars and do you know what I mean?
Like you have it better, why do you care if someone else has it even better than you if
you have it good?
You should never look at someone else's plate and be like, why do they have more food?
You should look at your own plate and do I have enough and maybe look at someone else
and be like, do they have enough?
But don't look at someone else and be like, I should be having that, that sort of feeling
of being jealous and being like, oh it's unfair, it's unfair that they have more.
Who cares as long as you're satisfied.
That's exactly how they feel though.
I know but that's, to me that's, it's like, it doesn't, it's so irrational like you're,
you have every...
It's not irrational for them, it's irrational.
No, it's real to them but it's still irrational.
For you and for me and for people who have certain kind of comfort, that's the thing.
That's what I mean by not all of us experiencing the same reality.
Here's the thing, here's the thing, if I told you, if I just, people's concept of what happy
is is like so fucked up, that's why I have something against happiness but I can go on
for like hours about that but like, so people say, if I ask you, let's take someone who's
happy okay?
So are you happy?
And they say yes.
I'm like okay, can you list out all the reasons why you're happy?
And then they're like, okay, I can go to a restaurant whenever I want, I can blah blah
blah, I have kids that love me blah blah, okay?
Then I say, okay by the way, that's great, now did you know that there are aliens that
live and they live in like, you didn't know this but they live like right on the outer
atmosphere of earth and they live in this great like hunger games, like palace of like
royalty and it turns out that you can actually fly as a human but they've limited you and
you can't fly.
Are you happy?
Most people would be like no, what the fuck, that's fucked up.
But what on that list that you just wrote down that made you happy has changed?
That list is exactly the same, you should still be happy but now you feel like oh I'm
missing out on something and then that makes you unhappy?
Your list has not changed.
Yeah, they want to be special.
That bothers me so much.
So your happiness is relative to other people's?
Yeah, for them.
I'm not saying it's right, I think it's-
I know, that's just-
But that's not going to change, it's just a matter of evolution, I think chimps are like
that.
Exactly, exactly, there's the whole thing about the chimp and the grapes.
I've always thought if we want to understand people really well, we have to start watching
a lot of documentaries about chimps because that explains a lot, the jealousy, greed-
Right, no, they have evolutionary roots but that doesn't mean that they're okay.
Just like, I'm not looking at someone being unjust and then looking at a chimp yelling
about not getting enough grapes and being like, oh yeah, well that chimp really had
a point, that chimp is really smart and really deduced based on logic and reason behind that.
For the chimp's logic and reason, that's the thing, how are we going to compare a human
logic and reason with chimp's logic and reason?
But that's what they're doing.
I have the same feeling about religion and extremely religious people, that they just
buy into that fact because that gives them a sense of purpose and that's a problem I
think.
When you say it's rational to them, what do you mean?
Because okay, I can see how they can think it's rational.
What I mean is that I'm going to quote David Lynch, a great director and philosopher I
would say, that if you have a golf ball size consciousness, your understanding of the world
is a golf ball size.
If you have a box, that's the amount of your understanding of the world.
If it's infinite, okay, okay, fine.
So what I would say, what they are experiencing, you know, that triangle of our crucial needs
and stuff, it starts with, yeah.
So they have less amount of security and comfort and ease of mind than you, me and privileged
people.
It's not that we're privileged, but we're pretty comfortable.
Yeah, okay, I know what you're going to say, sorry to cut you off, but what I would say
to that is like, there's a difference between something being rational to them and it being
rational.
So objectively rational.
I don't think there is such a thing as objective rationality.
Oh, well, we can talk about that another time.
Yeah.
I think we, there are certain laws like gravity and yeah, but nothing like related, even,
you know, related to morality at all.
What about Sam Harris's whole moral landscape?
I love that book.
And do you not agree with it?
I don't know.
I think he changed also a lot of, not a lot, but some way of thinking about his too.
After that book came out, you mean?
There is a bit, I see the difference between moral landscape and wake up, right, or waking
up.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Which one did you like more?
Can I guess?
Yeah.
I think you like waking up more.
I think so too.
Yeah.
So I really liked the moral landscape a lot and I just didn't like waking up.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I listened to it and I was like, no, well, I mean, he just talks about spirituality,
but there's nothing there that was like a new idea to me.
It was more like just talking about spirituality.
I basically like him coming to that place that he considers that, which I think is pretty
cool.
And just so your listeners aren't confused, when Sam Harris talks about spirituality,
it's not like regular people talking about spirituality.
He just, he's using that as a word because he has no other word to do.
He's a neuroscientist philosopher who...
Atheist too.
Atheist.
One of the greatest atheists.
So let me ask you two final questions.
The first one would be, what is the purpose of life?
There is no purpose.
A purpose kind of to me implies some sort of higher being.
That's another reason why I have something against the word deserved.
When anybody says, oh, you deserve this, there's something that irks me inside.
And women say that a lot.
This is all ties back to...
We didn't get to talk deeply about your hatred for women.
No, but women say this thing all the time.
They're like, girl, you deserve that break.
You deserve...
Girls use the word deserve like far too much.
Explain to me one sentence.
What is the core difference between men and women?
Oh, there's so many.
So I'll tell you, a man's sort of power and status in his life comes from him struggling
hard to make it.
Okay, unless you're just really good looking, which there are very few guys that are good
looking and just make it off their good looks, versus a girl who can just be...
When I say girls, I'm talking about like, let's say you're seven and a half and above,
because then if you're six and below, you're just...
If you're five and below, you're like, I'm sorry, you might as well be a man.
So I'm talking about like a certain status of women, okay?
So if you're a woman, then you just like, guys would just like, take your luggage for
you, just do everything for you.
I remember I was...
There's a story about this guy who did stand up for like 30 years, was doing great.
Finally like, he went off stage, like everyone's applauding and like turning heads and stuff.
I'm like, he's like, yeah, I feel good.
Then some hot girl came in like two minutes later and all the heads turned to look at
her in the same way that he got looked at because he was a celebrity.
That's just quintessentially, that's what you have to do as a man.
Those 30 years of experience to just kind of equal what a girl gets automatically.
Yeah, but you should look at countries like Saudi Arabia and Afghanistan and those places
that they keep their women in the closet and in the beekeeping suit and they can't even
drive.
So who gives a fuck if somebody can't get drinks or applause because they have big boobs?
People are attracted to big boobs and they are to male physics, majority of people.
I think we should all sort of aspire to be like Saudi Arabia and I'm just kidding.
So I'm only talking about the Western world, of course.
I don't care about the...
I mean, I do care but I'm not ranting about...
I'm not like gonna go tell a woman who's getting acid in her face like, yo, well, you had it
good your whole life so now you get acid.
I'm not gonna tell that, you know.
So I'm talking about like...
And then there's so much more awareness of women's issues than there are men but yet
the society thinks it's totally the opposite.
The way society thinks like, if you grew up in the 80s, if you were born in the 80s and
above, you're just feminized.
It's all liberal arts, like every...
Even the word rape was only very recently made to incorporate a man.
People think that women were more oppressed than they were.
People think that women make $0.75...
Oh, it's much better than it used to be.
No, but also people think that...
There are still a lot of problems like pay is a big deal, you know, call paying.
No, but that's been shown to be false.
Like, so another thing I used to study was economics like a little bit and there's so
many economics, economic like just things about money that people are wrong about.
So the whole $0.75 a dollar thing is shown to be false.
If you make everything equal, like you try to control for, does this girl have the same
education as the guy?
Has she stayed in the company the same as the guy, the same position?
Then they get paid the same.
It turns out they get paid the same.
The difference is like if you add up, like in total, how much money do women make?
How much money do men make?
It's about 75% of what men make, something like that, okay?
And then that comes in because women make different choices, they go into different
fields.
Men tend to go into engineering or whatever, women tend to go into whatever, other things
that pay like...
So you're saying the women who go to engineering do not have equal pay to men who are engineers?
Oh, well then you have to also account for did they have kids?
Did they take time off of work?
So if you account for all these things and did a man take time off of work, blah, blah,
if you account for those things and you hold them, that's what you have to do in science
before you make a correlation between variables, you have to fix every other thing to say that
these things are the causation, there's a cause and effect.
Then it turns out that the pays are equal.
And so I could just send you so many videos on that.
There's search pay wage gap myth or something like that.
There's tons of videos about that.
Yeah, it's a myth.
Are you following US politics, US election campaigns?
No, no, I don't know who Bernie Sanders is and I don't know, I want...
I would love it if Trump got elected.
I kind of like what he says.
A lot of people say like, yeah, Trump sucks, like, oh, why?
He's just a negative man.
That's not even like an argument against like, what particular policy...
Well, you know, actually, we were talking on the first episode of this podcast how I'm
going to support Donald Trump if Bernie Sanders don't get the Democratic candidacy because
Hillary Clinton is the other person.
But she brought Sarah Palin to the game and that's where he lost me because that is just...
Trump brought Palin?
Yeah.
It's just...
Marketing.
It is, but I mean, to what kind of people is just bringing shit show, you know?
Anyways, let me ask you the final question.
If you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you tell
that intelligent alien as the worst things that humanity has done and what would you
tell that alien as the best thing that we have achieved?
Oh, that's a very good question.
Um, the worst thing is like, just torture, just people being tortured.
Like how, just, you know, like, obviously people will say, yeah, the US torture is going
to be...
Well, okay, fine, whatever.
It's in the US too.
But also Japan and like World War II, like some of this stuff they did is crazy and no
one hears about it because it's just not taught, they talk more about Germany.
So like it's like, I used to just, like I said, how sometimes I want to get mad at things.
Like I want to get mad at that girl on my Facebook.
Sometimes I want to know, I want to know the real, how the world really is.
Even if it makes me like feel sad and depressed.
So sometimes I'd like purposely go out of the way to search for depressing facts just
because I feel like to get a sort of broad-eyed, bird's-eye view of everything.
Some of the things Japan did was fucked up.
So just suffering and torture is the worst.
I don't particularly care about slavery.
I mean, no, don't misconstruing me anybody in the future.
What I mean is like, to me, slavery compared to suffering, compared to torturing, sorry,
is not that bad.
Unless you torture your slaves.
There's nothing that compares to torture.
So torture is the worst that humanity does.
Even to animals, I really hate that.
The best thing is, I don't know, the internet, the internet, something like that.
Yeah, it's probably something like that.
Or whatever is the start of a technological revolution that would eventually make the
internet anyway.
And the internet's going to make something else and make those other things and singularity,
blah, blah, blah.
So whatever started that, that was the best thing.
Because without it, we wouldn't be on that thing to the singularity.
And I think the singularity is going to be the best thing.
But whatever starts it is obviously also good because it started us into an almost inevitable
push to the singularity.
Like Ray Kurzweil shows, even past World War I and World War II, that law of accelerated
returns doesn't even perturb, despite World Wars.
It's almost like inevitable.
So yeah.
