because we are sentient, because we have self-consciousness, we are masters of our
fate. And I think one possible destiny for us is to become a star-faring species, that is,
to reach for the stars. Hello and welcome to the 43rd episode of Neohuman Podcast. I'm a
Gabbahari etygologist on Twitter and Instagram, and you can follow the show on liveinlimbo.com,
iTunes, and YouTube. My guest this week is Dr. Michio Kaku. Welcome to the show, Dr. Kaku. Okay,
well glad to be on. Thank you. Why don't we start with your background, the work you've done, and
what are you focused on now these days? Currently, I work on something called string theory. I'm the
co-founder of string field theory, which is one of the main formulations of the theory. And we want
to get the theory down to a one-inch equation that will allow us to fulfill Einstein's dream of,
quote, reading the mind of God. Now, string theory in its present-day form, there are five
different string theories, and each one can be summarized by string field theory. In fact,
that equation is my equation. However, my equation is about an inch and a half long. We want to get
it down even further and allow membranes to coexist. This is called M theory, and that's even a more
advanced version of string theory. So right now, some of the brightest minds on earth are working
on M theory to try to find the ultimate formulation of the theory of everything. And how is the work
progressing? Well, pretty good. We have a pretty good handle on string theory in ten dimensions. Ten
dimensions is the dimension I usually work in. However, we now know from the work of people at
Princeton that there is an eleven-dimensional model out there, and we want to find the reformulation
of string theory in terms of eleven dimensions. That's really hard, because eleven dimensions,
they are membranes, and membranes are much more difficult to work with than strings. And so,
like I said, some of the brightest minds on earth now are trying to understand M theory. M for
mystery, magic, or membranes. You have a new book. I want to talk extensively about that. But before
that, I'm just wondering, I read a couple of years ago that physics is turning into a philosophy,
because there are a lot of theories that are very difficult or close to impossible to prove. What
do you think about that? Well, that's a valid criticism, because physics should be based on
things that are testable, reproducible, and falsifiable. However, now we're after bigger
game. We're after the theory of everything, the theory of the entire universe. Each solution of
string theory is an entire universe. A direct proof of that would require creating a baby universe in
the laboratory. In other words, to become God. Now, we can't do that, of course, but look at how
science is done. Science is done indirectly. Now, we know, for example, that the Sun is made out of
hydrogen. How do we know that? How do we know that the Sun is made out of hydrogen? No one's been to
the Sun. We've never sent a space probe to the Sun. So how do we know? Because we analyze echoes,
echoes from the Sun called sunlight. And by analyzing sunlight, we know the Sun is made out
of hydrogen. In the same way, we will prove the correctness of string theory and M theory by
looking at echoes from the 11th dimension. Amazing. Your new book is called The Future of
Humanity, Terraforming Mars, Interstellar Travel Immortality and Our Destiny Beyond Earth. How
many books have you written before this? Because you've been writing for many years. Well, yeah,
I've written about 15 books. Four of them are New York Times bestsellers. In fact, the book The
Future of Humanity just hit the New York Times bestseller list just a few days ago. Fantastic.
Congratulations. Well, thank you. Many of the other books I've written, however, offer PhD
physics students. So if you are a third or fourth year grad student in physics, then you can take
some of my textbooks, which are for PhD students. However, that requires five years of calculus and
six years of ordinary physics until you become a third year grad student. So what made you interested
to write about the future of humanity at this point? Well, it all started when I was eight
years old. Everything started when I was eight. They announced that a great scientist had just
died and they flashed a picture of his desk with the unfinished manuscript of his greatest work.
Now, I was fascinated by that story. I didn't know who this man was. I just knew that he couldn't
finish something. So I said to myself, well, gee, what's the homework problem, right? Couldn't he
ask his mother? I mean, what's so hard that you can't finish it? So I said to myself, I want to
learn about this man. I want to learn about what he couldn't finish. Then I found out the man's
name was Albert Einstein. And he was working on the unified field theory, the theory of everything.
And then I went to the library to find out more about the unified field theory. And I found
nothing, absolutely nothing, not one book, not one reference to explain to me the unified field
theory. So I said to myself, when I grow up, and I become a professor of theoretical physics, I want
to at least at least write books for myself, for the kid that I used to be, so that I would be able
to access the unified field theory. And so I said to myself, well, if no one else is going to write
those books, I'll write them. And that's what I do. I mean, I've written some of the the earliest
books on string theory. But how can you predict what's coming in the future? I'm just wondering.
Well, I'm a physicist. And I know that you cannot absolutely predict the future. All you can do is
predict trends based on what you know, physics. Now, in 1900, there was a contest basically, to
predict the next 100 years. And these predictions were hilarious. Some people predicted that we
would have blimps, fleets of blimps to go across the Atlantic Ocean. Now, why were these predictions
of 1900 so wrong? They didn't know that they were four fundamental laws, forces of the universe.
Today, we know that today we know that there are four fundamental forces like gravity,
electromagnetism, which makes light bulbs possible and computers. And then we have the two nuclear
forces, the weak and the strong nuclear force, which lights up the sun, for example, we didn't
know that in 1900. And that's why some of the predictions are crazy. Today, we do know the four
fundamental laws. And so the predictions we make, yeah, we're going to make bloopers, we're going to
still make mistakes, but they will be based on sound fundamental physics. That's the difference
between predictions now and predictions in 1900. So to predict the future of humanity, first we
need to define what humanity is today. How would you define what is a human today and how this
definition is going to evolve in the future? Well, we think that humans are homo sapiens,
but we're different from the other creatures on the planet earth. 99.9% of all species on the earth
have gone extinct. If you don't believe me, dig underneath your feet, right underneath your feet,
and you'll meet the bones of the 99.9% of species that never made it. Extinction is the norm for
all life forms on the planet earth. Now, we're different. We have a big brain. We can perhaps
change our destiny. So our species is unique among all the other species, because after all,
the dinosaurs did not have a space program. And because the dinosaurs did not have a space
program, they're not here today to talk about it. They got wiped out when that meteor or comet hit
Mexico 65 million years ago. But we do have a big brain. We do have rocket ships. We do have a space
program. And so we're in a position to defeat the odds of nature. That nature says all life forms
must eventually die, except maybe us, homo sapiens. And how do you see the role of technology in who
we are today? Well, we have to ask ourselves, where did civilization, wealth and prosperity
come from? You know, 300 years ago, the average person lived to be about 35 or 40. They didn't
live very long. It was a hard life. You had kids and then you died. Life was a bitch back then.
What happened? What happened was 200 years ago, we physicists worked out the laws of thermodynamics.
That made possible the steam engine. And the steam engine made possible the locomotive, factories,
and the Industrial Revolution. And then 80 years after that, we physicists worked out
electromagnetism, which made possible the electric age. All of a sudden, we had dynamos and generators
and light bulbs and television. 80 years after that, we physicists invented the computer,
the transistor and the laser beam. And with the transistor, we ushered in the high tech age.
And now we are undergoing the fourth wave of wealth generation. And that is artificial
intelligence, biotech and nanotech. And once again, physics is helping to lead the way
into the future. How do you feel about AI, artificial intelligence?
Well, there's a debate between Elon Musk of SpaceX and Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook.
Mark Zuckerberg says that robots are going to open up new pathways for prosperity, jobs,
industry, and it'll be beneficial for society. Elon Musk of SpaceX and Tesla Motors says,
not so fast, not so fast. What happens when the robots take over? That could be a huge mistake
on the part of humanity. So I was on CNN on the Quest show, and I was asked that question,
who's right? My position is both are right to a degree. Zuckerberg is right that for the
next several decades, there are billionaires waiting to be minted. There are industries
waiting to be revolutionized. Jobs, industry, economic activity will come with artificial
intelligence. But let's not be naive. There's a certain point at which robots become
dangerous. That point is when they become self-aware. Now, robots do not know their robots.
If you compare them to an animal, they would barely compare to a cockroach.
Cockroaches can just barely walk across the room. That's the level of intelligence of most of our
robots. However, in the coming decades, robots will become as smart as a mouse, then a rat,
then a rabbit, then a cat, then a dog, and finally a monkey. Now, monkeys are self-aware.
They know they are not humans. Now, dogs are confused. Dogs think that, well, humans are dogs
too. We're the top dog, and they're the underdog, and that's why they obey us, because they think
we're the top dog. Now, monkeys aren't that stupid. Monkeys know they are not human. But so when
robots become as smart as a monkey, I think we should put a chip in their brain to shut them off
if they have murderous thoughts. How would that work out with ethics and morality though,
because if something is self-conscious, within that thing, whatever that may be,
has the right to express itself? Well, yes and no. But at the present time, robots do not have
rights. I think robots will eventually have rights, and that point is when robots suffer pain.
You see, pain is very important for us to exist. People who are born without pain sensors usually
have their fingers and toes amputated, because you take all sorts of risks and do dangerous things
and not know it, because you have no pain sensors. So eventually, robots are going to have to have
pain sensors. They're going to have to feel pain. Otherwise, they're going to try to do feats of
superhuman ability and destroy themselves. And so robots will eventually be equipped with pain
sensors. At that point, I think we should think about the ethics of robots, because you don't want
to make robots suffer unnecessarily. Because if you are a human, yes, there are sadists among us
who will want to torture animals and who will want to torture robots once they can feel pain.
So I think eventually, we're going to have to look at the rights, the robotic rights of robots. But
that's still many decades into the future. But eventually, I think we will have to have robot
ethics. One of the arguments in favor of controlling artificial intelligence advancement is that to
make it more human, or in a way put our ethics and morality within the machine. And I've always
wondered, do we really know where our ethics and morality come from? Are ethics and morality
objective or subjective and interpreted depending on the individual ability to process information?
Well, I think Galileo said it the best several hundred years ago. He was asked about ethics,
religion, science and all that. And he said the purpose of science is to determine how the heavens
go. The purpose of religion is to determine how to go to heaven. So in other words, science is about
natural law. It's about discovering the laws of nature. Religion is about ethics, about how to go
to heaven, how to be a good person, the golden rule, how to be nice, how to treat other people
nice. And so if you want to know what ethics is, it's relative to the tribe. Whatever holds the
tribe together is considered good. Okay. And so that's why ethics changes from tribe to tribe,
because it's relative to the glue that holds the tribe together. So I think evolutionarily speaking,
that religion was good for us, because back in the caveman days, if you were becoming intelligent,
you bad mouthed the leader, you hijacked the leader, you killed the leader to take over the
tribe because you were smarter than him. So I think tribes of our ancestors fell apart.
Intelligence is quite corrosive and quite divisive. You bring five people together,
you get six points of view. And so I think tribes that were based on intelligence fell apart and
died. They're not here today. They left their genes in the gene pool. The genes that survived
were the genes of people that had religion, a glue of ethics that held the tribe together.
We are descended from them. That's why if you are a Martian landing on the planet earth,
you'll realize that every society on the planet earth has a religion, because religion is a glue,
is ethics. It's about how to become a good person, how to go to heaven, how to hold the tribe
together. How do you see the role of religion today? Well, in our early days, I think religion
had an extremely positive aspect to it, because it kept us together, because there was no science
back in those days. I think there's a gene for religion, a God gene. I think there is a God
gene. There's no science gene. There's no let's pick this apart gene. No, the genes for jumping
to conclusion, for making outrageous conclusions, for guessing. Yeah, there's probably a gene for
that. But there's no gene for science. Science is an acquired taste. You have to learn about science
the hard way by making all sorts of mistakes. And so I think in the early days, we needed religion.
Religion and science were dialectical. You could not have intelligent apes without religion keeping
the tribe together. But after a while, when we discover industry, we discover the four or five
industry, we discover the four fundamental laws, we discover hydrogen warheads, then science has to
deal with ethical questions for the first time. It's no longer just creating a science experiment.
No, it's destroying the human race. That's the power of science. And so religion is bad if it
fosters divisiveness, sectarianism, fundamentalism. But it could be good if it fosters humanitarianism.
And fosters knowledge and growth and democracy. So I think that in the old days, yeah, religion was
good for us, even if it was outrageously mystical and outrageously irrational. Today, it's a double
edged sword. It could hold the tribe together, or it could also destroy the tribe. Can it also be
considered an obstacle on the way of science? Let's consider, for example, immortality,
which is a very big deal if you reach it. And I know you talk about it in a book. But from a
Christian point of view, or any other monotheistic religion point of view, you you're born and then
you die and then you get rewarded or punished. So how would this work, especially in a democracy
where anybody's vote is equal to the other person? Well, in a democracy, people get to choose their
destiny, right? Not a king, not a queen, not a dictator, but people begin to choose their own
destiny. And I think that immortality, or at least partial immortality, is definitely in the cards
in two ways. First is digital immortality. And the second is genetic or biologic immortality. So
let's break them down. Digital immortality is when you digitize everything known about your digital
fingerprints. Already in Silicon Valley, there are companies offering, for a price, digital,
a form of digital immortality. Everything known about you, your credit card transactions,
your Instagram photographs, your emails, everything in your digital fingerprint can be compiled.
So then in the future, when you go to the library, instead of getting a book about Winston Churchill,
you'll talk to Winston Churchill. All his mannerisms, all his memories, all his speeches
will be recorded and digitized. I would love to talk to Einstein. I would love an opportunity
to talk to a digitized Einstein that digitized all his works, all his theories, all his speeches,
all his videos, all of it digitized. In fact, I think that you will be able to talk to your
great, great, great, great, great, great grandkids because their ancestors have been digitized. Now,
once we digitize you, you are in some sense immortal. And what do we do with it? I think
we should put it on a laser beam and shoot it into outer space. In one second, your consciousness
will be on the moon. In 15 minutes, your consciousness will be on Mars. In four years,
you'll be on Alpha Centauri, the nearest star. Now, let me stick my neck out. I think this already
exists. I call this laser porting. It's much more efficient than flying saucers. And I think this
already exists. I think aliens in outer space probably laser port their consciousness across
the galaxy at the speed of light. They don't bother with rockets, with weightlessness,
with rocket accidents and cosmic rays and accidents. They don't bother with that. They
simply digitize themselves and shoot their consciousness across the galaxy.
It's really interesting to me that when we're talking about certain things like becoming a
multi-planetary species, you're a theoretical physicist, you talk about it, and then you see
someone like Stanley Kubrick also make a movie about it, Space Odyssey, which is basically about
becoming a multi-planetary species, correct? Yeah. In fact, in the first 10 minutes of the movie,
he actually had talking heads. He had physicists, some of them acquaintances of mine,
who were interviewed about extraterrestrial civilizations. But then at the last minute,
at the last minute, Kubrick cut the first 10 minutes of his own film. And so the film became
somewhat mystical. However, today it is still perhaps the most logically consistent encounter
with an extraterrestrial civilization. More than likely, an extraterrestrial civilization will
explore the galaxy with robots, self-replicating von Neumann probes that land on the moon,
like the monolith in the movie. On the moon, they create copies of themselves and they shoot out
to land on other moons and make copies of themselves again from the lunar soil. And that way,
from one monolith, you can get two, then 10, then 1,000, dot, dot, dot, an exponential growth of
these things. And you can therefore analyze the entire galaxy in 100,000 years. So on our moon,
I wouldn't be a bit surprised if on our moon there is evidence of an ancient visitation
because the moon has no rust, no erosion, no water to speak of. It's the ideal place to put a probe,
a von Neumann probe, that simply monitors our solar system. So I think that movie, 2001,
is perhaps the most realistic encounter with extraterrestrial intelligence. Now, to be fair,
I get emails from people who say nonsense. I've been abducted, they say, by aliens from outer
space. I've been on their flying saucers, so I know what aliens are like. My advice to you is,
if you've been abducted by aliens from outer space, my advice to you is, steal something.
An alien paperweight, a chip, a scissors, anything. Steal something, because there's no law against
stealing from an extraterrestrial civilization. No law to prevent you. You're not going to go to
jail stealing from an alien. And you'll have bragging rights afterwards. And you'll have
something that is testable, falsifiable, and reproducible. That's the hallmark of true science.
There seems to be a similarity between those who think they've been abducted by aliens and those
who think they spoke to God to become a Chosen One. It always happens when no one else is around.
Yeah. And look, I don't dispute the fact that these people believe that. You put them in a
lie detector test, they'll probably come out smelling like a rose. My only thing is that science
is based on things that are testable, falsifiable, and reproducible. And things like proving the
existence of God is outside of our testability. Therefore, these questions like miracles, angels,
gods, and things like that, maybe they exist, maybe they don't. But science says nothing about
them, because they're not testable, falsifiable, and reproducible. Is there any big picture objective
or rather philosophy for science and technology? Could perhaps becoming a type one civilization on
the Kardashev scale be considered the objective? Yeah, we are about 100 years from becoming type
one. A type one civilization is planetary. They control the weather, for example. They control
planetary energy, like Flash Gordon or Buck Rogers, about 100 years in the future. Then we have type
two, which is stellar. They control the output of entire stars. They play with stars, like Star
Trek. Star Trek would be a typical type two civilization. Then there's type three, which is
galactic, which means they control black holes. They control the black hole at the center of the
galaxy. They roam the galactic space lanes. Now, what are we on this cosmic scale? Are we controlling
the weather? Are we playing with the sun? Do we roam the galactic space lanes? No, we're type zero.
We get energy from dead plants, but we are about 100 years from becoming type one. For example,
what is the internet? The internet is the first type one technology to land in the 21st century,
so we're privileged to be alive to see the birth of the first type one technology. What language
will they speak? Well, already on the earth, the two most popular languages on the internet are
English and Mandarin Chinese. What music will they listen to? Well, we already have a planetary
youth music called rock and roll. We already have the Olympics, the planetary sports. We already have
the beginning of planetary fashion with Chanel and Gucci. We're seeing the birth of a planetary
culture and a planetary energy source right before our eyes, but this transition is the most
dangerous of all. As Elon Musk has said, maybe they're out there, but maybe they blew themselves
apart. So, we are still mired in the swamp. We have all the savagery of our rise from the swamp.
We have sectarianism, fundamentalism, anti-scientism. We have all these horrible
isms facing us, but once we hit type one, then we become planetary, and then we become
planetary, and nations, wars will gradually become a thing of the past. So, I'm optimistic
that once we hit type one, it'll usher in an age of Aquarius. But it's a big if, right? Yeah,
it's not guaranteed. We have lots of self-inflicted problems. Some people say that we should not go
to Mars because we'll mess up Mars just like we messed up the earth. Well, I think we should
not go to Mars to escape global warming. We should cure global warming on the earth. We are
earthlings. Our first priority is to spaceship earth, and that means we have to get our act
together. We have to rain in nuclear weapons. We have to deal with global warming on the earth,
not by fleeing to Mars. What are some of the most important crucial science and technology
and innovation that we have to reach from now in order to reach type one civilization?
Well, the big technology facing us right now is artificial intelligence, as I mentioned.
In the future, I think the robotics industry will be bigger than the car industry,
because your robot, your car, will become a robot. You'll talk to your car. You'll argue with your
car. You'll ask your car for information, for help. You'll gossip with your car, and so your
car will be part of the AI robotics industry. That's how big it's going to be. For example,
when you want medical care, you'll talk to RoboDoc. RoboDoc is a software program in your wristwatch
that analyzes your body to give you expert advice. RoboLawyer will help you when you're
in a car accident, and you've got to talk to a lawyer if you're traveling in Europe and you
don't speak the local language. We'll be surrounded by artificially intelligent technologies,
and that's going to change the way we function. Further down the line, I think we're going to
have BrainNet. I think we'll telepathically communicate with other people. In my book,
The Future of the Mind, I actually go to the laboratories where we do this. We actually do
this at Berkeley, where I got my PhD many years ago. We actually now can photograph dreams. We can
now upload memories. Things that were once considered preposterous about the mind, we now do.
Can we understand the purpose of dreaming just out of curiosity now? Oh, the purpose of dreaming. Well,
actually, from my book, The Future of the Mind, I interviewed one of the leading experimenters on
dreams, and I asked him, what is dreams and why do we dream? He said the following. He said, first
of all, when you brain scan the brain when you dream, the center part of the brain is the brain
of emotion, the monkey brain, the amygdala. That lights up, but the amygdala also generates nightmares,
and that's one reason why many dreams are horrible because the amygdala lights up. The front part of
your brain shuts off. Blood flow to the prefrontal cortex goes to near zero, and that's why your
dreams are fantastic. Things that were obviously violating common sense exist freely when you dream
because the front part of the brain is shut off. And then lucid dreaming, when you actually control
the direction of your dream, has proven to be correct. In Germany, at the Max Planck Institute
in Leipzig, Germany, they took a lucid dreamer, put him in a brain scan, and bingo, he was awake
while dreaming, and he could control the direction of his dreams. In fact, you can learn how to do it
too. There are Buddhist textbooks, centuries old, that teach you the method of how to become a lucid
dreamer, which we now have verified experimentally in the laboratory. Also, we can begin to photograph
that dream as well. At Berkeley, they put a subject in an MRI scan, have him visualize the Mona Lisa,
for example. When you brain scan him, you analyze 30,000 pixels representing blood flow in different
parts of the brain, put it in the computer, and bingo, a picture emerges of the Mona Lisa.
Fantastic. All the technology and science that we have now and coming in the future, they depend
on our computing power, correct? And from that perspective, we can say that our life and our
future now depends on silicon. But what's coming after silicon? What is the next generation of
computing? Is quantum computers a viable candidate? Yes. You realize that Silicon Valley could
eventually become a rust belt. If you drive through Pittsburgh and Pennsylvania, you see all
these closed factories because technology went ahead and the industry did not, and so we have a
rust belt. Silicon Valley could become a rust belt because one day the transistors of silicon
will become obsolete for two reasons, heat and leakage. So when transistors become so small
that they're the size of molecules, then molecules leak and molecules create tremendous
amounts of energy. The chip will melt as a consequence and short circuit because of leakage.
So we physicists are desperately trying to find a way to maintain computer power because we're so
used to Moore's law that computer power doubles every 18 months. But as George Harrison once said,
all things must pass even the age of silicon. So one day Silicon Valley will go bankrupt perhaps,
and technology will go someplace else where we have quantum computers and molecular computers
that compute on molecules and compute on individual atoms. However, we're not there yet,
and these technologies are not ready for prime time. What are your thoughts on education system?
Are we doing a good job training the new generation to deal with all these overly complex
new wave of change that is coming? And what do you see as a suitable education system for the age of
AI and automation? First of all, we're all born scientists. We're born wondering why the sun
shines. We're born wondering where we came from and why the stars twinkle. Then we encounter the
greatest destroyer of scientists known to science. It destroys thousands of scientists. This destroyer
of scientists is junior high school. Even as we speak, thousands of junior high school kids have
been turned off to science because they're taking their first courses in science, and science is
made boring. It's made into memorization. Learn the parts of a flower. I mean, memorize the moons
of Jupiter. I mean, who cares? I'm a scientist. I never have to look up the parts of a flyer.
You just go to the internet, and there it is. In fact, in the future, the internet is going to be
inside your contact lens. You'll blink, and you'll be online, and there's the periodic chart. So why
do you bother to memorize all the elements of the periodic chart? You have to use the chart,
not memorize the chart. And so I think that we should revamp junior high school because
that's where we lose millions, millions of scientists. It also has a lot to do with the
society, right? Because every kind of technological innovation works as good as a society that adapts
it. So when we're lacking in education, we're practically building a society that can be fooled
by a lot of false information. And I just want to go back to democracy, that when they can't vote,
and the voting power is equal, if somebody believes that they've been abducted by aliens,
they can neutralize some scientist votes. Well, what we can do is change our curriculum,
because our colleges and high schools do a good job of graduating students to live in 1950.
The only problem is, we don't live in 1950 anymore. But the curriculum is so stale, so
so backward, and yet that's what we teach our kids. For example, sometimes I teach physics for pre-meds.
These are the people who are going to be operating on you using the most advanced MRI scans and PET
scans and EKG scans, right? What do I teach them about MRI scans and PET scans and all,
and radiomedicine and advanced cancer research? No, the book says I have to teach them about
friction, tuning forks, levers, and pulleys. Now, they were important 300 years ago, but we moved on.
We've moved on since 300 years ago. But there I am teaching them about things that were very
interesting 300 years ago, but are not cutting edge anymore. But that's how we teach physics to
medical students. Are you telling them that what you're teaching them is? Yeah, we teach them
Newtonian knowledge, but we've gone way past Newton. We're into the age of Einstein. We're into
the age of electricity and computers and high-tech, but we don't teach that stuff. And so when you go
to a laboratory, I talk to the doctors there. They're clueless. They don't know how these things
work. They just know that they work. And as a consequence, we've had horrible accidents.
Cat scans, for example, hit you with a tremendous amount of radiation. It has to be done very
carefully by technicians. However, these technicians don't know up from down with the
radiation coming from the cat scan. And there are all these pictures of patients that have lost
their hair because of the enormous quantities of X-rays that hit their scalp. I mean, we find
these pictures in Hiroshima, but there we have hospitals where the patients look like victims
from Hiroshima because the technicians don't know how to calibrate cat scans. Wow.
There's a question from one of our listeners. How do you see the rise in the future of the private
sector involvement in the space industry? SpaceX would be a very good example of that.
Well, just realize that in 1966, the Apollo space program consumed 5% of the entire federal budget.
Now that's unsustainable. 5% of every tax dollar you pay in your income tax went to the space
program. So now prices are dropping like a rock. When you saw the movie The Martian with Matt Damon,
that movie cost $100 million. But the Indian sent a space probe to Mars for $70 million.
So you realize the Hollywood movies about going to Mars cost more than actually going to Mars.
So the Chinese, the Indians, they've all said that, yeah, they're going to put their flags in the
moon. So there's going to be a race. And are we up for it? Well, last month, millions of people
tuned in to watch the launching of the Falcon Heavy from Cape Canaveral. Why? It's just an
ordinary rocket for God's sake. We see them take off all the time, right? No, the Falcon Heavy was
a moon rocket, fully capable of sending astronauts to the moon. Now, this rocket was paid for, not by
taxpayers, but by a private individual, Elon Musk of Tesla Motors. This is incredible. Think about
that. A private individual opening up his checkbook and bankrolling a moon rocket, which could take
our astronauts to the moon. That's how much prices have dropped. And that's how much space has opened
up for the government and for private enterprise. And I think we're entering a new golden age.
A new golden age of space research, because prices have dropped. In fact, it takes three days to go
to the moon, one week for a round trip to the moon. I think in the future, our grandkids may
honeymoon on the moon. That's how close the moon is. Well, honeymoon on the moon. Mars, of course,
is farther away, but the moon will be for tourists in the future. I actually drove up to Kennedy
Center for the launch of Falcon Heavy, and that was the first launch that I was seeing, and it
was the most incredible experience of my life. Those two Falcons coming back down and just
watching science fiction. And something that was very encouraging was how engaged and how excited
people of different age groups are, and there were thousands of people there. Yes. So we're entering,
I think, a new era in space exploration, that the old days when space was considered very, very
expensive, and only Russia and the United States could do it, those days are gone. We're talking
about private entrepreneurs. You realize the richest man in the world, Jeff Bezos of Amazon,
he has created his own spaceport in Texas. He doesn't even bother to go to Cape Canaveral.
He shoots his rockets from his own spaceport. And Google, Google has created a space port
and Google, Google billionaires not to be left behind, they're jumping into the game. They want
to mine the asteroid belt. It's a whole new ball game out there. And that's why one of the reasons
why I wrote the book, to teach people that, hey, we're entering a new golden age of space
exploration. Prices have dropped. Countries like India and China are jumping in the game.
Silicon Valley billionaires are underwriting the cost of it. I mean, we're going to go to the stars.
Do you see governments on the way of progress at this point? I mean,
what we're talking about now and what's happening with SpaceX and all the great
things with technology and science. Meanwhile, we watch in Congress and Senate what they're
talking about, you know, businessmen and lawyers. Yeah, well, I think there's going to be a mix.
Private enterprise has a definite role to play because taxpayers don't have to foot the bill.
And they in turn want to have a return by mining operations when they go to the moon and Mars.
And I think a union between government financing and private enterprise is what's new with this
new space race. We're basically going to be competing against ourselves and we're going
to be doing it safely and cheaply, which was not the way it was during the Cold War.
I'm really curious to know your interpretation of two quotes. One is by Albert Einstein and the
other is by Nikola Tesla. Einstein said, nature shows us only the tail of the lion, but there is
no doubt in my mind that the lion belongs with it, even if he cannot reveal himself to the eye all
at once because of his huge dimension. And then Tesla said, my brain is only a receiver. In the
universe, there is a core from which we obtain knowledge, strength and inspiration. I have not
penetrated into the secret of this core, but I know it exists. Are these quotes talking about
the same thing? In your opinion? In other words, is the core that Tesla talks about the same as
Einstein's lion dimension? Well, I think there's similarities. I think geniuses somewhat think the
same way. They're talking about the theory of everything. When Einstein looked at the claw,
he was talking about gravity. But he said that gravity must be connected to a much greater thing
because look at light. Light is different from gravity. The other paw is light. So why should
this lion have two paws? There must be a head, there must be a tail and other legs. And that,
he thought, was the unified field theory. And Tesla too was tinkering with this idea that there's
something out there. He thought maybe it was a vacuum that contained the secrets of our existence.
And now we realize that, well, yes, the vacuum does have energy. It's called dark energy. And
that's the energy of the Big Bang. That's what's causing the expanding universe. And so if you
understand this energy of nothing, the energy of the vacuum, then in some sense, you can understand
the deepest secrets of the universe. That is the unified field theory, which is what I do for a
living. Would that be considered the end of physics? No, just because you are watching a chess
game, and you slowly figured out how the pawns move and how the bishops move. That doesn't mean
you're a grand master. That doesn't mean you're a master of chess. No, it just means you know how
the pawns move and how the bishops move. And so I think even if we do have the theory of everything,
that's just the beginning. Because look, think of all the questions we can answer with the theory of
everything. Is time travel possible? Einstein's equations say yes, but is it really practical?
String theory will answer that question. Wormholes. Can we have gateways of the universes?
What happened before the Big Bang? Is there a multiverse of universes? All these questions
are way beyond Einstein's theory, but that's exactly what string theory can do. String theory
in principle can answer these questions about parallel universes, time travel, wormholes,
the multiverse. So once we have the unified field theory, that's just the beginning.
I just want to know very quickly your thoughts on the simulation theory as well.
Sure. What are your thoughts on simulation theory? Well, many people saw the movie The Matrix,
and they thought to themselves, wow, can reality be uploaded into our minds? Is the universe nothing
but a simulation? In other words, did God put a CD into a CD player and hit the play button?
Once you hit the play button, here we are acting as if we have free will, acting as if we know
what we're doing, but we're just puppets. We're just puppets dancing on the computer screen
just because somebody hit the play button. Is that reality? I don't think so for the following
reason. If we were to have a computer to simulate the weather, the computer would have to be
enormous in size just because there's so many molecules inside the weather. In fact, the
smallest object that can simulate the weather is the weather itself. So the smallest object that
can model the universe is the universe itself. Now that's using Newton's equations, assuming that
atoms are hard steel balls. Quantum mechanics says no. Quantum mechanics says that these balls can
be everywhere at the same time, which of course violates common sense, but who cares about your
common sense? So we're in a situation now where quantum mechanics makes many more possible
universes than Newton's equations. So if Newton's equations cannot be simulated except by Newton's
equations themselves, then what chance do we have of doing this with quantum mechanics? So that's
why I do not think we are a simulation. We have free will and we're not marionettes dancing just
because somebody hit the play button. Well, Dr. Kakou, this has been a pleasure and an honor to
speak with you. Allow me to ask you the last question that I ask all my guests, that if you
come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you say as the worst thing
humanity has done and what would you say as our greatest achievement? Well, I would say our worst
achievement is our ability to self-destruct. We have all these self-inflicted problems like global
warming, nuclear proliferation, and germ warfare that could end this great experiment called
humanity. But on the positive side, I side with the words of General Eisenhower who once said that
pessimists never win wars. Only optimists win wars. Only optimists change history. And because
we are sentient, because we have self-consciousness, we are masters of our fate. And I think one
possible destiny for us is to become a star-faring species, that is to reach for the stars.
Thank you.
