Really, the big thing that has kind of been a part of my thinking for a long time and
something I put in the book pretty prominently is how do we build a better government that
doesn't do the things that we have going on today?
How did the ancient people build their governments?
Because they had to figure it out somehow.
What was the organizational principle?
What were they doing when they were establishing the Athenian Senate?
What was the impetus that made them do this and create these institutions?
I think the psychedelic drugs are a big part of that.
Adam Dresche, welcome to Neo Human Podcast, episode 93.
93, huh?
All right, sweet.
Thanks for having me.
I appreciate it, bro.
What does that number mean to you?
Because you're kind of a person who looks a little deeper into things than general public.
Yeah, no numerology on my side.
Adam actually reached me on Twitter after the interview with Jason Giorgiani.
Yeah.
That was a great interview.
I really enjoyed that.
Thanks, man.
It's always a pleasure talking to him.
You mentioned your book, which we're definitely going to talk about today.
It's called Eden and Entheogens, Psychedelic History from the Bronze Age to the 1960s.
This is a book that is available for free.
I believe that this is a result of 10-year long research, as you mentioned.
Yeah.
I've been kind of working on it.
I've been serious about it for the past year or two.
I spent about 10 years on it.
All right.
We've got to get to all of that, but let's start with your background.
The lives you live, the work you've done, and what are you mainly focused on now these
days?
Right.
Yeah.
So basically, I kind of grew up in a pretty Christian conservative community.
Went to a Lutheran school, my home state here in Minnesota.
That's kind of like what introduced me to the Bible and kind of got me curious about
biblical stories.
Grew up and then actually went to an art school, so that kind of went the other way.
Basically I studied music for a while.
After graduating from art school, I was just kind of disaffected with just a lot of things
in society and a lot of things that I just didn't agree with about the way our country
is kind of going.
I kind of became more conservative after graduating from art school and I've been kind of back
and forth between the two.
That's kind of like my educational background, I guess.
Then since then, it's basically been, I just kind of do a lot of reading and a lot of research
on my own time.
I'm kind of independent, so I don't have a publisher.
I published my book independently on the Internet Archive.
Basically I do things myself, pretty much.
I work odd jobs and do stuff like that, so yeah, that's kind of my background, I guess.
What year was it that you graduated from art school?
That was in 2010.
2010?
Yep.
I think that period is a period of red pilling for a lot of people and awakening for a lot
of people.
I mean, Bitcoin came in 2008 and then 2012, 2013 seems like a lot of people began to waken
up to seeing outside of this matrix because this is what it is.
Totally.
Yeah.
I mean, Alex Jones was definitely part of my waking up journey for sure, because he was
just an animated guy and it was just so bizarre.
I just thought he was such an interesting dude.
Yeah.
There's a meme factory, walking meme factory.
Totally.
Yeah, totally.
Well, I found it interesting.
You shared a meme with me earlier today, kind of paving the way for this interview.
Basically I was thinking about how I can describe it to people who are listening and not watching
it.
It doesn't need to be described, you know, it related meaning that you were basically
surprised that somebody would say that, yeah, bro, come and talk about your book on my podcast.
When are you ready?
Right.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
So, yeah, because I reach out to a lot of people and I see, you know, I just kind of throw
it out there.
I'm like, look, I wrote this book.
It's kind of working with Terrence McKenna's ideas.
You might be interested in this and so I don't hear back from a lot of people basically,
but you know, I send it out there at least just to put it out there.
So when I do get a response, I'm always just like super excited about it because I think,
I don't know, I just think Terrence McKenna is a little bit like under regarded as a kind
of, I mean, as a serious thinker.
I think, you know, he's kind of in kind of meme territory right now in the kind of popular
culture.
I mean, he does have some kind of like, you know, he gets some accolades from people like
Rogan and stuff, which is good.
But I just think there's more to kind of dig into about like things that he said and kind
of his line of thinking, I think is super relevant about getting to like a very originalist
idea of, you know, where do human beings come from?
What is that kind of natural state of government for us?
And you know, even a natural state of religion, perhaps, that he kind of touches on that,
I think in Food of the Gods and some other books.
And you know, he's definitely kind of a part of that 1960s milieu and that cultural kind
of Renaissance that happened.
And I just, I think that, you know, more of that I think would be very beneficial for
American culture because I think you have, you have right now, you have people kind of
being kind of divided off into these kind of party groups.
And it's just that real like spirit of common good that was kind of alive in the 60s and
that Terrence McKenna kind of worked with and built off of, seems to me to be something
that, you know, we can learn a lot from.
And so that's one reason why I respect Terrence a lot and also because just the content of
his books I think are really interesting.
Yeah, the description of your book on your Twitter is that they discovered the relationship
between Stone-Dape theory and the Bible with my new book, Eden and Inclusion is now available
free of charge on the Internet Archive.
So let's get right to it.
First of all, what inspired you to begin this research into psychedelics and Bible?
You mentioned that you got interested in Bible as a child.
I kind of share that kind of interest in religion.
I grew up in Iran and I had, I had few years of getting really into Shiism, but in the
mystical part of it, you know, just the whole feeling and atmosphere around it, you know,
you don't even care whether or not the stories are true.
Yeah, right.
There's, yeah, there's kind of, yeah, there's a romance to these religions, I think, in
a way.
There's a very romantic vision of these religions.
And yeah, I don't know if you were part of the Sufi schools at all, but yeah, I'm kind
of interested.
I've had Sufi friends, they've been around, but you know, Iran, because of the kind of
theocracy that they have, a total monopoly, no one else basically has the right to express
themselves except a very small circle of Shia clerics and the militants who are, you know,
might very well be the next, the future of that country.
Right.
Yeah, I mean, yeah, you don't know.
I mean, it's kind of chaos over there.
Yeah.
But you know, it's human nature because what happened there can very well happens here.
Oh, yeah, totally.
100%.
I mean, yeah, I mean, actually, I do have a kind of Islamic background too, which I
didn't really touch on.
Yeah, my dad's from Morocco, actually.
So yeah, so he kind of comes from a Muslim family.
He's not so much Muslim himself.
He kind of came over to the United States to kind of get away from the Islamic world,
so to speak.
And yeah, so, you know, he's pretty new age, I guess, my dad in his own way, but he's still
also very traditional.
So yeah, so I mean, so yeah, I kind of, I'm very interested in the Islamic world too.
Not just like the biblical kind of Christian Jewish stories, but the Islamic stories, I
mean, they're all very interconnected, interrelated to a large extent.
And I see potential for de-escalation of conflict between these religions in kind of developing
a unified kind of framework of how to interpret them.
And one way that I do that is with Terrence McKenna and by identifying areas in the Bible
and areas in Islam as well, where you have evidence of hallucinogenic drug use.
And it's very, it's a very interesting kind of argument to make, because it kind of undermines
a lot of the kind of authoritarian versions of these religions today.
When you can point to places in the Bible that like, it's almost obvious that these
people are using hallucinogenic drugs.
This is what real fundamentalism looks like.
It looks like Woodstock in the 1960s, and we can get into some of those stories and
examples if you want to.
But it's really, it's an interesting way of looking at the Bible to say, you know, you
go back to the Bronze Age in the time of King David, you know, close to 1000 BC.
I mean, it's not like, you know, Judaism today, you know, in Israel or, you know, in the United
States, it's nothing like that.
It's a war cult.
When they're taking drugs, they're kind of have this very ecstatic sense of music.
And that's a big part of their temple worship is this music thing going on.
David was a songwriter himself.
The Psalms are supposedly written by King David.
So you have this really interesting psychedelic culture that is just obvious to anybody who
reads it through the eyes of like the 1960s.
You can just see very clearly these people are very different.
They venerate sex and fertility.
It's like, so they're coming out of this very archaic religion and culture that was centered
around, I mean, drug sex and rock and roll.
I mean, it's kind of the way that you can frame it.
And I think it's funny to look at it this way in a certain way.
But it's also, I mean, it's a serious argument too.
So that's kind of how I frame and set up my scholarship.
And it's just become more and more apparent to me the more I've looked at it.
Like this is really kind of the best way to interpret what these religions are about and
what they were really like in the early days.
It's different now because the traditions get passed down.
People stop taking the hallucinogens.
There's new rules invented and made up over the years and you get these dogmatic kind
of monoliths of these religions.
But going back and doing that examination of the earliest form I think is very helpful
for maybe not necessarily reviving a kind of archaic Abrahamic religion, but maybe even
just imagining what a new religion would look like.
Because these people invented these religions back then.
They were invented by people like Moses and Jesus and according to the biblical scriptures.
Some people say Jesus might not be real, Moses might not be real, but I mean, yeah.
I picked a couple of books to also mention throughout this conversation.
One of them is The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross by John Alec Rose, Study of the Nature
and the Origin of Christianity within the Fertility Cult of Ancient Near East.
He argues Jesus was a mushroom and people were taking him and having these experiences.
Is that really weirder than believing the status quo story of Jesus or believing the
status quo story of, for example, Scientology?
Because anybody who has had any kind of a psychedelic experience can be like, yeah,
I totally get it.
I totally get how you can't have religious experiences on psychedelics.
Precisely.
I mean, yeah.
In all the other world religions, I mean, you can kind of see in paganism, in South
American shamanism, you see this use of these kind of plant drugs for this purpose.
It makes sense that we'd find this in the indigenous traditions in the Middle East as
well.
It just makes sense that that's what you'd find there.
For me, I mean, that's what I've seen.
The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross is very interesting.
I do have a piece about that book in my book as well.
Basically, I have a minor dispute with Allegro and R. Gordon Wasson.
They kind of hyper-focused on a particular mushroom, the Amanita mushrooms, if you're
familiar.
They're red mushrooms with those white spots on them.
They're kind of associated with Santa Claus and kind of Northern European, kind of pagan.
I was going to say, a very significant role in culture all across basically.
Yeah, right, right.
It's kind of a European mushroom that Europeans are very familiar with.
When you get these European scholars going to the Middle East and looking at the Dead
Sea Scrolls, looking at these things, what they end up doing is they kind of associate
it to a mushroom that they're familiar with, which is the Amanitas, because that's kind
of common in their kind of cultural milieu.
There's some other reasons that I get to in my book.
You can read it if you want to dive in there.
Basically, scholars didn't really recognize that psilocybin mushrooms were present in
the Middle East for a long time.
They thought it was a South American thing.
All through the 50s, 60s, 70s, since Gordon Wasson went to South America, they thought,
okay, these are South American mushrooms.
They're different, but actually, they're all over.
They're in India, they're in Indonesia, they're all over the place because these spores can
just travel.
It's very likely that the mushrooms talked about in the ancient Jewish and the ancient
Christian tradition might actually... They might have had Amanitas, but they might have
also had psilocybin mushrooms as well.
There's probably allusions to opium in various places as well.
There's this big kind of drug concoction actually that was relevant to that region and to that
area at that time.
That's my one dispute I have with Allegro.
Jesus is very interesting.
The whole notion that Jesus was a mushroom, I think that Allegro gets this from the book
of John in the New Testament because basically what Jesus says is he says, I am the manna
of the ancient Israelites.
The manna is like this weird thing that comes out of a fog and it grows in the wilderness
and it feeds the Israelites for 40 years and it basically tests their faith is what it
says in the Old Testament.
The manna was this weird religious sacraments that came out of a cloud of fog and that's
really interesting because well, that's actually the conditions that are necessary for growing
psilocybin mushrooms if you're in a warm moist climate.
They really do a lot to identify that basically all the environmental conditions around them
were suitable for growing mushrooms.
When you read through Exodus 16, I do a really detailed analysis of this in my book.
You probably have this, so Jesus saying, I am the manna, I am the mushrooms that the
ancient Israelites used to eat in the wilderness, in some way I think he's actually tripped
out on drugs.
This is a real recording of something that he actually said.
I think he's like trying to explain his trip in some way and he's just losing his mind.
That's kind of the way that I frame it.
A lot of New Testament is like that.
Yes, exactly.
Yeah.
It's just like, and that's what these mystery traditions were, like the mystery schools
in the ancient world where these kind of processes and these banquets where you would go and
take psychedelics with a group of people and there'd be some kind of theatrical performance
of some kind where somebody would give some kind of like rhetorical sermon or speech.
It was meant to communicate like secret information about what was going on and kind of this occult
kind of form of communication.
It seems that Jesus was doing something like that.
He was kind of personifying in some way.
He's saying, I am the mushroom, you have to eat of my flesh, you have to drink my blood.
It's like speaking as if he is a mushroom, if that makes sense.
Yeah.
I don't think it necessarily negates the possibility that Jesus was a historical person.
On your last episode with Jason, you guys brought up Apollonius of Tiana, maybe is what
it is.
Yes, I believe so.
Yeah.
So yeah, possibly it was a syncretism between multiple personalities compiled into the Bible.
The New Testament, in my opinion, is like the least historically credible of the three
Abrahamic religions because it's produced by the Roman Empire, which was persecuting
these rebellious Jews basically that Jesus was kind of intermixed with.
So the credibility of the New Testament to me is the most suspect as a historical document.
The Old Testament and Islamic literature, I think, are more credible.
So I kind of focus more on that as far as my thinking is concerned.
Yeah.
Islam has this forever sword basically on top of Koran that anybody that changes a single
vow, that's basically a crime and it's the biggest sin you can commit.
So it has stayed the way it has stayed after I think the third Khalif who took power after
the prophet, basically because there were different versions of Koran, he gathered all
of them, burned all of them and there was one that had remained as it is right now.
Since you mentioned Jesus and what we were talking about, Jesus and psychedelics and
all that, there's also a claim that Moses was high on DMT when he saw the burning bush.
The problem is that, let me mention this also, that in Iran a religious authority has considered
a psychedelic to be medicine and said that it's halal as one of the clerics.
But you can totally see why there is a push all across in order to keep psychedelics away
from individuals because there's a huge difference if you're even going to read the Bible, even
going to read the New Testament, when you're experiencing some kind of a psychedelic state
rather than every Sunday go to church and this is the outcome of it that more and more
people are turned off by it.
I have thousands of channels and you cannot catch up with that because I'm not going to
get my morality from you because there are other people who are more famous than you
and I look up to them.
People have lost belief because you can't really force people to believe in something
that they cannot experience.
And I think this monopolization of experience is the biggest crime that has done to humanity
that hey, you believe in Jesus, you believe in New Testament, go and read it but have
the kind of an experience that will take you out of this frame that you call self, that
you identify with, right?
Yeah, definitely.
I agree with those sentiments that the church today is not even what it was a hundred years
ago.
I mean, it's totally different.
They could probably say that for all three of the Abrahamic religions.
With technology, with these new personalities, these new leadership figures in our society
and our culture and the direction of our culture, which is gravitating more towards personal
experience and probably, I mean, really psychedelic drugs.
I see this happening almost everywhere I look.
These forms don't apply to this kind of paradigm in a big way.
What you're saying about how people have other authorities and other leaders that they can
look to outside of the church that seem to be more credible.
I think of Joe Rogan and Terrence McKenna even as kind of classical religious figures
in a way because one, they take psychedelics, right?
So they have had that real personal experience with some kind of divinity.
Also because they kind of frame things, they intellectually frame things and communicate,
and that's really a big part of what the church did and has done for thousands of years is
framing the current political events and goings on and happenings in any empire and trying
to help direct the course of action of a community in some way and creating a narrative.
It worked out good in some cases.
For example, the Protestant churches in the early colonial American states, the Protestant
churches preached out against the British empire and these authoritarian systems of
control.
So there are some cases where the church really kind of served its purpose in a meaningful
capacity, but it seems you could make arguments, I think, both ways.
There are some areas where the church is kind of really trying to step up and kind of get
some level of justice for at least for conservative people in American society today.
But I think that they're not really totally doing enough because I think it's very surface
level appeals to religion and there is not a really deep appeal to what the core of religion
is.
In order to get there, you have to include some kind of conversation about these psychedelics
because it's always been part of this despite the fact that it's been swept under the rug
to a large extent and at least that's my view on it.
Yeah, I agree and they're not going to go away.
They've been around much longer than we have been.
We've talked about Stoned Ape Theory a couple of times on this podcast.
You make the connection between Stoned Ape Theory and creation of religions, which basically
can be extended into creation of cultures and societies because all of these have been
built in one way or another on religious foundations, especially in Western, modern day Western
kind of society that we're talking about.
The Stoned Ape Theory, for those who don't know, is a theory that human brain, correct
me if I'm wrong, human brain evolve faster than the rest of our body and the main reason
for that is that we start munching on psychedelics basically and have those kind of experiences.
It's a theory by Terence McKenna.
It's a sensible theory if you think about it.
Now you can expand from that that maybe psychedelics have been planted here by some other species
or extraterrestrial and anything is a possibility, right?
But what is the connection from the point that we start munching on psychedelics until
we're creating a concept of God, that there is a higher authority.
Based on my knowledge, the oldest that I know of, the evidence of it was found in this cave
in France that was made into a documentary, Cave of Forgotten Dreams, I think, by Werner
Herzog.
It's like 30,000, 35,000 years ago and they found the first symbology of people worshiping
some kind of a higher authority.
Right.
It's an interesting question.
Yeah, how does the idea of God come out of these psychedelic experiences?
It's an interesting question.
I don't necessarily know if I can answer it.
What I might say is that the general experience of psychedelics, how you could describe it
in some semi-scientific way I think would be to say it creates a kind of internal biological
singularity for a person.
Basically your senses get all mixed up in a way and you perceive everything all at the
same time and you don't have your filters on basically that you don't say, okay, this
is that, this is this.
You're mentally kind of incapacitated in a way and you're not capable of making any kind
of value judgments or doing anything like that.
So what happens is you get into this, what I would call a direct confrontation with reality.
You're really seeing reality for what it is when you're under the influence of psychedelics
is one way of looking at it.
Sometimes that reality can be terrifying.
Sometimes it can be very enjoyable.
It kind of depends on who you are as a person and how you're going into it, the mindset
you're bringing to it.
But the thing that I think most people experience is they get to this point where they see that
everything is somehow connected in our world and you become open to this idea I think of
a kind of vast depth to the world that you can't understand.
For example, we don't know where we come from as human beings.
We don't really know the answer to that.
We have some scientific theories, we have some history that shows us, okay, there were
people over here at this point in time.
But I mean, as far as where life comes from, all of these deep questions, psychedelics
kind of confront you with this reality that you don't really know, that we don't really
know and that there has to be some kind of, I think, author behind this.
And I think that it's a natural conclusion for people to come to when you see cause and
effect in your ordinary life, well, something had to cause us to end up here.
So you kind of come to this conclusion that there is something behind nature that is orchestrating
everything that we do in some way.
A lot of the language with, for example, the psychedelic community in the 1960s, I find
very similar to language you find in the Abrahamic religions about submission to God, right?
When you take trips, you got to let go, you got to let the thing take its course.
You can't try and control it or you're going to have a bad time.
It's the same way with, I mean, the Prophet Muhammad, you know, is all about submission
to God.
I mean, it sounds like he's giving advice about how to trip in some way.
So there's one way of looking at it for sure.
And Muhammad, especially in my opinion, has all of the cultural indicators of somebody
who's taking psychedelics.
But just to briefly close this up, one thing I would say is that how stoned ape theory
makes its way into the Bible, I think is actually pretty linear and pretty straightforward.
So the way that people stumbled upon these drugs in the earliest form was basically when
they were hunter gatherers, they were hunting livestock.
They'd track the animal and they'd look at the poop and they'd see, oh, there's some
mushrooms growing here.
And then they'd eat these things and they'd kind of get a physical invigoration out of
it.
You know, the fight or flight response gets kind of invoked.
And then they continue their hunt and, you know, so it became part of this hunting ritual,
you know, and this part of feeding your family and doing all of this.
This I think was very clearly carried over into the nomadic lifestyle of early Israelites.
They had cattle, they were domesticated by the time we get to the Bible, but they had
cattle, they were pooping everywhere around them.
They probably came into contact with these mushrooms and there's areas in the Bible where
you can say it's pretty clear that they did.
Exodus 16 is really the best example we have.
So where religion comes from, it's these people who are taking these drugs, I think, and basically
they have these imaginal experiences where they're visualizing everything in the world
and their sensors are kind of removed and they can really see how things work.
And so that leads to good planning.
That leads to good thinking about things and these people who can predict what's going
to happen end up earning the respect of their communities and they end up becoming leaders,
they become priests, they become saints, they have the ear of the God or whatever.
And so you get this whole administrative structure that leads to basically the first forms of
government, I think, out of that kind of scenario.
And it seems pretty clear when you look at the Bible that that's basically what it was.
It was the first leadership, the first clergy were the people who were taking these drugs,
having these direct experiences.
And that's basically what created religion in the form of the state as it was like in
Egypt and in these early primitive religions.
Religion and the state were one and the same.
So that deeper theological element, I try not to explain it too much because personally,
I mean, I'm kind of a believer, I believe that there is a deeper theological element
to taking hallucinogens and I don't think it's necessarily explainable.
I don't think we, I think it's kind of, the one thing that we can explain though is historical
events where people took this stuff or potential historical events that are recorded in places
like the Bible, also in places like Plutarch's Lives.
I think the Iliad has some records of people taking hallucinogens too.
And yeah, we can get into some of that as we go along here.
Yeah, I think it's not explainable by design, by the essence of the experience, which it
really goes to a deeper layer of the question that I asked because a lot of, not a lot of,
all of our understanding based on religions of this divine experience is based on words
and based on language, yet, as you correctly said, this experience is unexplainable.
This is something that I talk to my girlfriend a lot about it, that I don't even see the
point of trying to describe, for example, a DMT experience because language don't belong
there.
Exactly.
Right?
Yes.
So the question is, if people were having these divine experiences before the invention
of language, so this concept of a divine being, a higher power, higher being, must have been
developed before language was developed because we're using words and language in order to
dumb down this experience, to try to describe it to people who are reading it rather than
doing it.
Right?
If this is the case, then we are committing the biggest crime against humanity by not
allowing people to experience this divinity that belongs to not only all of us, to everything.
It is everything.
Right.
Directly.
But you see exactly why this is happening because if you can't have direct experiences,
then you don't need a priest and all these kind of people, most of whom are crooks and
businessmen and basically those merchants around the table that Jesus decided to mess
their shit up, basically.
Yeah.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Well, the thing about language is actually kind of interesting too.
So something that personally I've experienced with psychedelic drugs, but also that seems
to be kind of an emergent phenomena is that you have this activation of this linguistic
capacity with psychedelics.
And there's some notions that psilocybin may help grow brain cells.
So the way that it grows the brain evolutionarily can kind of make sense if you have pregnant
women taking hallucinogens, these mushrooms basically, in archaic society, they don't
know any better.
It's just this fun time.
They take this drug and it's probably in some capacity mutating the brain of the baby inside
their womb.
I would imagine it's like a kind of reverse fetal alcohol syndrome or something.
But as far as language is concerned, what you have is you have these hominids being
born with perhaps larger cranial capacity, larger brain size, and they take these drugs.
They probably continue this tradition.
And what happens is you're exposed to this very deep and inconceivable reality.
The natural impulse, I think, for us as human beings, as living things, is to categorize
and understand what it is we experience.
And the way that we do that is by developing terms and language and things that we share
in common and we relate with each other about what we experienced.
So language, I think, probably emerges out of that chaotic experience as an attempt to
try and explain some part of it.
So not necessarily, and I think that's a virtuous maybe to an extent to try and explain a piece
of it, but you have to recognize you're not going to get the whole thing.
You know, it's not going to happen.
I'm sure people will be wrestling with this, you know, what the psychedelic experience
is.
I mean, if they want, if they choose to, they'll probably be wrestling with it forever.
But I basically, as far as my book is concerned, I just focus on history because you can look
at history and you can point at texts and you can say, this might have happened here
or this might have been going on here.
And when you contextualize things like, for example, the Old Testament of the Bible, and
you pull out, you know, sources from ancient Egypt and, you know, the Amarna letters and
you kind of combine everything and you put it in the right historical context, you can
get a really deep picture of what was going on in the Old Testament.
I mean, it's kind of been shocking for me personally.
I was surprised as I was writing my book.
I'm like, why hasn't anybody done this yet?
I was totally shocked.
Please describe this as in depth as you possibly can, the relationship between Old Testament
and psychedelics.
Yeah.
Oh, well, there's a lot of building blocks.
So the way that I write my book is very linear, very chronological.
It starts from the beginning of Genesis and it just goes through the stories and I touch
on the big important pieces.
Basically, the way that I frame it out in the beginning parts is that the first couple
books of Genesis are kind of mythologies.
They're stories about, you know, Adam and Eve in the garden and you kind of have this
mushroom story going on there.
And then you also have Cain and Abel, which is basically a kind of polemic that's basically
agriculturalists versus nomadic hunter-gatherers, basically.
And basically, Yahweh, the Abrahamic God, doesn't like agriculturalists.
He refuses their offering, he banishes Cain and he sends them out of the city and Cain
then becomes jealous and he kills his brother Abel, who's a nomadic pastoralist who God
loves or whatever.
It seems to me it's a very simple kind of primitive form of propaganda that says, look,
the hunter-gatherer is the lifestyle that you want to have because they're not beholden
to these emperors and these pharaohs in Egypt or whatever.
They don't have to break their back working the land for somebody else, they get to just
have their cattle, they live out on the outskirts of civilization, they get to relax, take it
easy.
And this is the kind of way of life that is pleasing to the Abrahamic God.
And also, part of that is probably the fact that you have mushrooms growing out of their
poop and that's their sacrament and that's part of this whole ancient religion that goes
back to Terence McKenna and the, you know, the stoned ape theory is this partnership
society with cattle, with women and with mushrooms, basically.
And you see that partnership society carry on through the whole Old Testament, you see
it everywhere.
If you're paying attention to it and you're looking at it through the lens of Terence
McKenna, you see that there's a veneration of fertility, you know, Abraham's given the
promise by God, you're going to have lots of kids, you're going to have a lot of sex,
you know, and then you have the promise of, or you have the relationship with cattle throughout
the Old Testament.
The Israelites are nomads after they leave Egypt, they live with cattle and they live
in the wilderness, quote unquote.
And then you have, so it's the women, fertility, and then you have the mushrooms, and there's
a couple of different places where the mushrooms really assert themselves as a very plausible
explanation for things.
And the most obvious one is the manna, which is described in Exodus, we talked a little
bit about this, but the manna appears basically as soon as the Israelites leave the agricultural
civilization of Egypt and they revert to a nomadic lifestyle, that's when the manna appears,
which is very interesting because it's consistent with everything Terence McKenna talked about,
about how cattle-oriented societies would develop partnership relationships with these
drugs.
So, the Bible is very consistent with things that Terence McKenna said, it's really remarkable.
And it just all makes sense once you realize this is a nomadic society of people who are
living on the outskirts of civilization.
And Moses is actually trained by this priest named Jethro, Shuaib he's called in the Arabic
tradition, and his training is basically seems, Jethro is a shepherd, so he has flocks of
sheep and Moses takes care of these sheep.
And again, you know, the sheep poop and the mushrooms grow out because they're in a fertile
area that's warm, those are the conditions for growing psilocybin mushrooms.
When Moses has his vision of the burning bush, I don't consider that to be a DMT trip, what
I think was happening is while he's looking after the sheep, he ate some mushrooms and
then he walked over to this bush and he had this hallucination.
Because the way the Bible describes it is that the bush was burning, but it was not
consumed by the flame, so it's not literal.
He's having hallucination quite literally, he's already tripping by the point he approaches
this bush.
And then after that, he has this visionary experience where he basically sees the future
is the way that the Bible describes it.
Yeah, they might have retroactively went in there and written the future in to that experience
but basically this seems to me like the moment where he kind of develops his strategy about
how he's going to get the Israelites out of Egypt is under the influence of these drugs.
And it's this very interesting liberatory message and the psychedelics kind of inspire
Moses to basically set out by himself with nothing into Egypt to basically start these
negotiations with the Pharaoh and say, look, you know, the Israelites were done working
for you.
We're in our own nation, we're our own people and we're done.
But he doesn't phrase it that way, he actually phrases it and says, I want to go with my
people outside of Egypt to have a religious ceremony for three days.
So he's basically just trying to get them out of Egypt across the Red Sea and then they
can just establish themselves as nomadic society because he had been experiencing that and
living that lifestyle since he was kicked out of Egypt after he assassinated some Egyptian
slave driver, basically.
So it's this interesting political story that is like fueled by mushrooms as far as I can
tell.
Moses has these insights and these incredible strategic insights about how to deliver the
Israelites out of bondage and out of servitude to the Egyptian empire and his strategy is
just to have the Israelites revert to a nomadic lifestyle.
They were supposed to take cattle and they were supposed to take loans from the Egyptians
before they left and they did this apparently.
And so there's this whole thing where they they landed from the Egyptians and got their
jewelry basically because they wanted to make sacrifices to their God or whatever.
They made up some excuse is basically what happened.
And then they just left and then they had that in their possession.
So the way the Bible says it is that they plundered the Egyptians without bloodshed.
So they basically looted Egypt and left and started their own society and civilization
living in tents.
And that was a kind of traditional way of living for lots of people at that time.
So it wasn't necessarily crazy or anything.
I mean, it was a normal way for some groups of people to live and then he organized everybody
according to their 12 tribes.
I allude to the Atlantis myth, too.
I think Moses might have been familiar with that.
The Atlanteans had 10 kings and the 10 kings kind of oversaw different parts of society.
Moses seems to kind of apply that same principle to the Israelites.
There's 12 tribes and they're overseeing their own tribes and they have these kind of the
system of delegated judges.
So it's a very kind of distributed government that gets established and it's really interesting.
So you see the generation of the culture from scratch in that in that old biblical story.
A lot of people say it's not real.
I won't prove that it's not real if it's not real.
I mean, there's a reason that this text has been preserved for as long as it has survived
for as long as it doesn't even matter if it's real because people are acting based on the
belief and faith in it.
Well yeah, I do personally, I think you get to a point in Genesis where you start talking
about Abraham and you have these historical events taking place.
I don't think that an ancient culture or society would make up stories about their patriarchs
and live by it for thousands of years.
I don't think that makes sense.
I mean, that's just not something that they would do.
If they were going to make up a story, it would be about gods and angels and it would
be some kind of psychedelic visionary thing.
When you're talking about historical events, I don't see a reason to believe that these
people would have made this up.
I think it's a highly incredulous way of looking at this.
It doesn't give these people any credit.
I mean, they were living in primitive conditions most certainly, but they were able to survive.
They had to be smart in order to survive in those conditions.
They had to make sense of the world around them.
So I am very much a kind of apologeticist about the Bible.
But that being said, I don't necessarily take the dogmatic approach that people today take.
I take a historical approach, like how did this historically happen if it happened at
all?
And that's kind of how I approach the stories because it seems to me that there's lots of
things in there that are very plausible.
And we have more evidence now than we used to.
King Solomon, for example, or sorry, King David is referenced in this stella called
the Tel Dan Stella.
It's basically a Hittite stone tablet that references a King David and it dates to about
the time that King David should be around.
This wasn't, I think it was a pretty recent discovery.
So there's some of these recent discoveries that are coming out that seem to indicate
that yes, the Israelites were real.
They weren't like fan fiction of these ancient people.
They were a real historical group and they had an empire and they had a civilization.
And in some ways, I prove this actually in my book and I have some images that I've shared
with you that we can go over as well.
But yeah, if there's any questions or any statements you have on that, you can go ahead.
Well, there are a couple of things.
First of all, the entire psychedelic experience and psychedelics as substance, to me, it makes
sense that they've been preserved as some kind of an exclusivity throughout history
because it's being considered knowledge, the source of knowledge.
Right.
Yeah.
So it's not necessarily what Bible or any other book, whether fact or fiction is talking
about.
It's also how it's being defined and how the people who define those concepts and stories
and lessons and all those things and teachings, how they're being pushed by a, again, a group
of people who have been setting and driving a narrative that you were saying that it's
been discredited very viciously throughout our lifetime, definitely.
But this is a narrative that has been being built since really the enlightenment to minimize
the role of saying, quote unquote, God, because we don't really know what it is because a
lot of people have capitalized on the definition of it.
So they can just take power, right?
Right.
So in absence of in God we trust, it will be in state we trust or in kings we trust
or in, you know, there is no shortage of people who want to rule everybody else.
Right.
Yeah.
So what I'm saying is that it doesn't really matter at this point, especially whether or
not something can be even proven by evidence and fact, because there are tens of millions
of people who are like, oh, I just don't believe it.
It doesn't make sense to me.
You know, and what I'm saying is that this not being able to have the direct experience
and then make sense out of all these pieces that each part can resonate with you differently.
You know, you go and read the Bible, part of it resonates with you.
You read Bhagavad Gita, part of it resonates with you.
And out of all of that, you create that raft that Buddha is saying you build a raft, you
cross the river.
Once you cross the river, you don't need a raft anymore.
Right.
Sure.
Yeah.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I think there's insight and wisdom in all of these traditions.
No doubt.
I mean, I think it's an interesting argument to make that, you know, that this is a kind
of perennial source for us today, as you were just saying, you know, to build that life
raft, you know, to kind of figure out our lives and to figure out.
And really, the big thing that has kind of been a part of my thinking for a long time
and something I put in the book pretty prominently is how do we build a better government that
doesn't do the things that we have going on today?
You know, how did the ancient people build their governments?
Because you know, they had to figure it out somehow.
What was the organizational principle?
What were they doing when they were establishing, you know, the Athenian Senate or, you know,
what was it?
What was the impetus that made them do this and create these institutions?
I think the psychedelic drugs are a big part of that.
I think so much so even that by the time you get to the Romans, that you have basically
what's called the stipend Palaeus symbolism.
It's the pole and the hat on top of it.
You've probably seen this iconography all over the United States.
It was a big piece of iconography.
This iconography in ancient Rome, I think, was a symbol of a mushroom.
And I think it was actually for the colonial Americans as well.
But what it meant was group government.
It meant collective thinking and action.
It was a senatorial congressional government.
That's what it was a symbol of.
And so when the Romans assassinated Julius Caesar, they kind of paraded the stipend Palaeus
around these mushroom symbols around saying, look, the group government is back.
We don't longer have this dictator Caesar anymore.
They appropriated this mushroom symbolism and used it to say, look, you know, the Senate's
back.
We're back in control.
We have a group government that's based on this ancient religious symbolism.
But they ended up, of course, getting overthrown very shortly after that.
So I don't necessarily think that the senators were authentic kind of religious practitioners
of this tradition at that time.
But the symbolism survived for a long time.
It was the symbol of a freed slave as well, which is very interesting because the Romans
had this idea about slaves that slaves can't be free because they don't have personal accountability.
They need a master.
They need someone to tell them what to do because they don't have a self-accounting
mechanism.
And this was their mentality back in those times.
And the thing that would set you free is to develop that self-accounting mechanisms, that
morality, that internal inspection, and something that can do that is psychedelic drugs.
I mean, so it's very interesting that this mushroom symbolism, the seemingly mushroom
symbolism became the symbol of the freed slave, someone who had gained self-mastery and self-consciousness
and self-awareness.
It's a very interesting thing, and it's also the symbol of freedom in the old biblical
stories as well.
So you see this happen over and over again, where when these psychedelic drugs get introduced
to a culture or a society, you have these situations where you have these kind of revolutionary
sentiments start to erupt and emerge, and that form new governments, I think.
And this is kind of my general historical theory that's kind of come out of my book,
is that this is how you build a better government, is you find people who take psychedelics and
you have them get in a room, you have them think about how to organize the society and
establish some basic rules, not necessarily to lord over or rule over other people, but
just for the sake of convenience of getting things done, because we can kind of see what's
happening now in our society, in America today, where everyone is just not accountable.
Everyone's just kicking the can down the road, and nobody's actually taking the crisis that
we're in seriously.
So I think a part of that lack of accountability, and I think of that as a religious problem,
that lack of ethics and that lack of loyalty to the people that you're supposed to serve.
I think this is a religious problem fundamentally, and I think the psychedelics are a big part
of that answer.
And the Bible is just a way for us to contextualize that experience, I think, and that's the way
that I look at the Bible and I look at the history of the Bible.
These guys did it already, so we can learn from them and bootstrap ourselves to that,
to their way of doing things to a certain extent, but we can create our own ways of
doing things.
We have a new environment, we have technology, we've got these live streams, we've got so
much.
But what I kind of just under the principles of the organization, obligated authority,
it's not all under one person's control or command, you have this kind of group government
in some way.
Decentralized.
Yeah, decentralized government, exactly.
Yes, yes.
So, sorry, I'm a little rambly, sorry.
No, no, no, no, no.
I mean, obviously, you're following a train of thought, I don't want to interrupt that.
I think a big part of what you mentioned is exactly in the difference of time, that the
time that we're living in, considering the technology, and we talked about this with
Jason Giorgiani too, that I don't see the evolution of humanity any separate or any
different than evolution of technology.
I think we have, and psychedelics actually, for me, fits perfectly, because technology
is a tool.
Psychedelic is a source of intention behind the tool, how to use it, and I think the biggest
dilemma for humanity, exactly going back to this duality of religion, good and bad, right
and wrong, is that at the core of it, it's not this or that, good and bad, right or wrong,
it just is, and how you shape it and use it and whether or not you reach your objective
or not.
That's how it's been, right?
And the time that we're living in right now, when I talk to people, for example, I don't
think democracy is an efficient system of governance anymore, and they're like, well,
so what's better than that, fascism, communism?
The thing is, we might not even know the system that we need for this time that we haven't
ever experienced it.
We can't just go through the same bucket of recycled stuff and pull one out, like, okay,
let's try this, let's try this, let's try this, it's not working, and that's why it's
falling apart.
It's based on lies and deception and corruption.
Yeah, it might be a creative effort and endeavor for us to figure out what a new system looks
like that works in our time and for our needs.
Yeah, religions are basically their value systems and their ways of prioritizing your
values, and so I think in some ways we do have to, in some capacity, reconstruct some
kind of a modern religion of some form.
I think actually it's already happening in a way.
I think places like the Joe Rogan experience are a place where that religion is kind of
being birthed, and you have this kind of orientation around psychedelics, around masculinity, around
a few other science to a certain extent, and your diets, and your health, and your wellbeing.
All the lecturers and all the people that go through his show are a lot of bright people,
and that's kind of our priesthood in some ways, and a lot of our podcasters are a part
of our priesthood in some ways.
They're giving us condensed information that we can use and apply to our lives that hopefully
improve our lives in some capacity, and in some cases the one area that people aren't
going into because nobody wants to get in trouble is how do we fix the government, and
also because it's also an extremely complicated question and an extremely complicated problem.
I don't think anybody has all of the answers to how to do that, but I think it's an important
question to ask and to talk about for sure.
There's also a problem of how to define the we, because we in Florida is kind of different
than we in California, for example, in the context of the United States.
Right.
Some people want more control and authoritarianism and tyranny because they think that, for example,
with respect to this virus, there is a way that you can defeat the virus, and some people
really do believe it, and people who don't believe it and lead and have access to resources,
they just capitalize on that and are like, okay, we're just kicking, as you said, kicking
the can down the road and keep changing the goalpost because this is an unreachable kind
of goal, and at the same time you see some people that are like, just leave me alone,
man.
I've got guns and I've got land, and if you come to my land, I'm going to shoot you with
my gun.
Right.
I don't know.
When I look at American history and I look at, and I've been doing that more as I'm kind
of writing my second book, that's a follow-up to my Old Testament kind of history book.
I've been looking at American history and I'm really impressed by the founders and how
insightful they were.
They were remarkably insightful.
They had a very limited, they had a sense of keeping the federal government fairly limited.
The jobs that it had basically were defense, so the military, and the currency.
There was an attempt at creating some kind of a universal currency that was managed by
the Congress, and other than that, the states generally had their kind of right to make
their own decisions.
I think that we're probably going to see some kind of reversion to more local government
in the United States.
Federalism, basically.
Revival of federalism.
Well, I don't know about a revival of federalism.
I think the opposite actually, where you're going to have, even county governments might
be very different from their neighboring counties in some cases.
If you live in a city or if you live in a rural area, I think you're going to have a
lot more regional policy making, and we're kind of seeing that actually with policy around
COVID and all of that.
I think you're going to see more regionalism happen, but it would be nice to have some
kind of federal framework where we can generally agree on some kind of fundamental principles
of what the federal government's supposed to do and what their job is.
Back in the day, it was the military, the defense of the country.
Everybody agreed that you wanted to keep the powers of Europe outside of our country because
they were all crazy monarchists.
Everyone really agreed on this.
All the states could agree to fight off the encroachment of the British Empire and keep
them basically in Canada because they couldn't get them out of Canada, but that was kind
of how it was.
Sorry.
By revival of federalism, I basically meant revision of federalism because there is some
kind of federalism.
Yes.
A revision, certainly.
Yes.
A revision.
Yes.
A simplification.
Yes, simplification, dramatic simplification because if it's not simplified, I really don't
see any reason why big tech wouldn't take over the role of government.
Right.
It kind of has in a lot of ways.
I don't look at government as, they're like, oh, break up the big tech.
They're not going to do that.
They have this idea that they can run them and they can ride them basically according
to their intention and priorities.
I don't think that's smart either.
The new power and new source of resources basically is data.
It's not oil.
It's not gold.
It's data.
You see this currency that it's going to disrupt the hell out of US dollar and Chinese central
bank digital currency.
They're all decentralized digital information, pieces of information, cryptocurrencies and
Bitcoin.
Right.
Yeah.
There's interesting potential and possibilities there too.
I imagine that we're not very far away from a kid in his garage being able to build a
system of government on his computer.
I imagine we're not very far away from that.
Yeah.
With smart contracts.
Yeah.
Exactly.
It may be possible for us to develop a blockchain based electoral system and currency and basically
that could serve as a kind of federal government, quote unquote.
You'd want to have some kind of backups in real space and time just in case you have
some kind of electronic disaster, a solar flare or something.
You want to have something backed up, but that would serve the purpose at least of basically
everything that the federal government does.
If you're trading that currency, it can just automatically tax you however much you're
bringing in according to whatever the policy is.
It may be all automated.
You wouldn't need any government employees.
It would cost basically nothing.
There's a potential for some amazing stuff to happen with this technology.
It's really interesting.
There's lots of opportunities, but I think the biggest area where we have problems in
our society is basically in terms of ideology and in our divisiveness as a country.
The founders would call it faction and it was something that they were very against.
They were against the party system actually.
They didn't want to have political parties.
A lot of them were very much against forming political parties at all.
They wanted people just to run their personal merits for office and that was kind of it.
They didn't want there to be these warring parties in this divisive internal fighting
inside of the country, but inevitably it just happened that way.
It seems like a natural outcome of tolerance and diversity as ideology.
You shouldn't be tolerant against intolerant people and diversity has no place for people
who are against diversity.
You can't be like, hey, we accept cancer because it's just natural.
I don't really understand how any nation can survive when you have and I'm saying it as
an immigrant.
I've been living here five years, four years, I live in Canada 11 years, but I've been to
other places in the world.
No serious country will allow people who hate that country fundamentally to play the role
of policy makers and lawmakers and leave their borders open and they're like, well, people
need help.
What?
You cannot treat a country and a nation like this and say that this is a serious country.
Precisely.
Part of that too, the factionalism is that it gets weaponized by commercial interests.
What happens is you have the Democratic Party is all about bringing in all of these underprivileged
people or at least that's how they market it, that's how they sell it, but what they're
really doing is they're getting slave wage labor into the country so that they don't
become-
You have voters.
You get hooked on slave labor wage and therefore you become dependent on government based on
some kind of a UBI or a food coupon or whatever and then you keep voting for the party that
is feeding you from the palm of their hand.
It's disgusting.
Yeah, it is.
That being said though, if our government was managed correctly, we could handle bringing
in as many immigrants as we wanted to.
If we had a public works program that just made sure that everybody had housing and everyone
was employed all the time, yeah, we could bring in as many people as we wanted to.
Because we have so much natural resources in this country, we could literally do that
for maybe 100 years and then at that point, maybe it'd probably be too much.
We could manage taking in tons of immigrants if we had a well-managed functioning government,
but the problem is that we don't.
Basically it's run by crooks who are in the private sector and that's basically a big
part of what that problem is.
To me, the way to fix this is we need psychedelic people in office who are familiar with the
psychedelic experience and have that inward sense of accountability, responsibility and
they try to do good just fundamentally as a character.
I totally agree with that and I think that's the moral high ground basically to say that
I've done psychedelics and I face my demons, my shadows.
How far do you think we are as a society for someone to run in this platform?
I am psychedelic conscious to the table.
I don't know.
It's funny and it's meme-worthy, who knows?
I think that's a great qualifying point of qualification, I guess.
To have somebody who basically says, yes, I've taken psychedelics, I've faced my demons,
I've looked at the world and I want to try and do good things, it's really simple.
It's really simple stuff.
If you have somebody with the right attitude to go into government and doesn't compromise,
doesn't sell out, you're going to have at least the prospect of sorting a couple of
things out.
I think until you get that psychedelic personality though, and I don't think it can be just one.
I think you need lots of senators, lots of county government people.
You need people across the board stepping up to the plate and just doing something.
It can't just be one leader, I don't think.
Maybe it could, but that's the whole concept of the Caesar.
I don't know if you're familiar with that or not.
Yeah, right.
Very popular now because people are basically looking for everywhere.
Right.
If people have problems, they're looking for someone from somewhere to come and fix that
problem without them doing anything.
Right.
Yeah.
I think theoretically, I like the idea of the Caesar.
I like the idea.
Yeah.
I like the idea.
Add psychedelics into the mix and I'm like, yeah, it's a go, it's a go.
Yeah, it's interesting, but it would be very efficient actually if the country became just
totally willing to hand over that much power to somebody to just basically restructure
the government, basically change everything.
That would be wild.
You could do a lot with one person.
That's something I've thought about too.
It's like, what could one person do?
It's an interesting question.
I've thought about it too much maybe, but yeah.
Elon Musk.
Yeah, Elon Musk.
Not to run the country, but the answer to the question, what can one person do?
The answer is Elon Musk because we are in a different timeline and different reality
after this dude pushed for reusable rockets.
It's a different game completely.
Yeah, right.
Sure, sure.
Yeah, it's different.
That's what one person can do, but the problem is that there are a lot of people who are
invested in things that those disruptive innovations will disrupt.
These people are in positions of power and I don't believe they can win.
We cannot win against technology, but they're slowing down everything at the cost of the
future and prosperity of the nation that they're supposed to be representing.
Yeah.
I think the biggest, like I said, the biggest challenge we have is this religious problem
and this internal division.
I think that once people start uniting around a central principle or an organizational principle,
then naturally you'll have some leadership figures start to emerge that can leverage
that group.
Right now, there's a big divide and conquer strategy going on that's very effective, I
think.
Very effective in its working wonders.
It has half a country hating the other half and it is a divide and conquer strategy to
get hold of the government and it's remarkable to me that it's gone as far as it's gone and
that people aren't snapping out of it yet.
Personally, I think more than half of the comments and everything on Twitter and YouTube,
I think they're all fake.
I think that lots of the times, these are bot organizations.
They're paying people to go and post and manufacture consent.
They're smart enough to realize that public opinion is made on places like Twitter, Instagram,
and so they leave comments on anti-regime rhetoric.
If Nicki Minaj, for example, just happened the other day, they leave comments on these
people's pages that make them look like social outcasts or whatever and that politicize everything
that happens in our society because it is a super effective way of keeping everybody
divided and to keep us from coming to what you could call a populist political center.
I think that basically, the Rust Belt is the future of American politics.
Whatever happens in the Rust Belt, if there is a social or political transformation in
the Rust Belt, it can totally overthrow everything in politics.
For me, as a midwesterner myself, I think one of the reasons I actually wrote my book
is that, look, if we oriented ourselves towards a more fundamentalist paradigm and perspective
in terms of just original, very basic questions about where humans come from, who are we?
The answer to that question, as far as I can tell, is psychedelics.
Psychedelics are the center of what caused us to become human.
Maybe there's aliens involved in there somewhere, I don't know, but psychedelics seem to play
a very prominent role through all world history.
Part of the revival of American culture, I think, will involve reclaiming that legacy
in some way.
I absolutely believe it and I've come to a pretty interesting conclusion about George
Washington.
I think he was a psychedelic head.
I really do.
He was friends with Native Americans.
He's smoked from a peace pipe and he has a vision at Valley Forge, which you can read
about, which is totally remarkable and totally interesting, that basically kind of describes
the future of the country in some ways.
People say it's not historical, it's fake, it was published in the 1850s.
It was published in the 1850s, but it was supposedly told to this journalist by a Revolutionary
War soldier.
It seems kind of unreasonable to me that during the 1850s, kind of during the tumult before
the Civil War, you're going to have this, basically somebody slandered George Washington
in a Revolutionary War veteran in the same breath with this newsletter that was published
that basically is George Washington, he's sitting in his barracks at Valley Forge and
he basically starts feeling these weird sensations and he gets sick to his stomach a little bit
and then he has this vision and these angels come and tell him the future of the nation.
It's remarkable.
It's a psychedelic trip and I think it was like an accurate report of the future in some
way.
I can't explain why or how, but I think that that's part of the mystery of this stuff and
it's been used for divination for a long time and probably because it works if you do it
the right way.
I mean, I don't know if we necessarily know how to do it the way that these people did
in the ancient times or maybe it's just blind luck.
Maybe just every once in a while you just get a glimpse into some kind of quantum reality
that allows you to see some kind of potential future or something like this.
I think this happened with George Washington and that's going to be in my second book that
I'm working on.
You can read the story of Valley Forge if you're interested in that.
It's a remarkable story if you haven't read it yet.
I think a lot of people get into psychedelic experiences with some kind of a preconception
or some kind of a bias.
They've already made a decision about what is enlightenment, what is God, what is all
these things and they go with that kind of an expectation into the experience and they
get something else and they call it a bad trip or whatever.
They do it a couple of times, they don't do it again or they keep doing it with kind
of that bias in their head all the time that hey, I got it, I'm enlightened, I know God.
So they start creating their own communities and try to see people wearing the same kind
of clothing, listen to the same kind of music.
But there is also an approach that it's like a feedback loop.
You're in this reality and then you have the kind of a psychedelic experience which is
a mirror into who you really are and then you come back and it's like a, again, technology
and humanity kind of evolution that you evolve with and because of it.
And at some point you got to realize that even psychedelic is a tool because if that
is becoming a God itself then I think you haven't got it because it's the experience
of what is rather than holding on to anything whether it's religion or culture or your identity
or psychedelics or anything like that.
And that's the dilemma really that the core of this kind of thing is in a way pointing
away from the conventional understanding of government and governance that we do have.
That there is a group of people who are going to be in charge of things and it goes way
closer to what you're describing the more of a regional, localized kind of structure
but again, it's a system that we have to develop based on our technology and our understanding
and our objective and this time.
Right, right, yeah and I think, I don't know, I have a lot of hope and faith in the younger
generation just because I mean, well, one, they're growing up with the internet, they're
growing up with access to lots of information and they can see through the propaganda and
the bull crap and that's a good, I mean, that's a really good sign.
Things that I see online are just the way kids talk about the government and how they
just have no trust or respect for it is very good as far as I'm good because that's going
to lead to some kind of really radical transformation at some point.
It's going to end up there and it's going to happen and also the fact that they're open
to people like Joe Rogan and that they're getting this education on Terrence McKenna
and the role of these psychedelic drugs and their potential role in ancient history.
This is going to train up and raise up like a new generation.
I mean, they used to call it the indigo children, you know, the 90s, right?
I really think it's a phenomena.
I think it's going to really have a huge impact on our cultural footprint in a way.
I think that we're just getting into the stages where it's going to be the case that you have
these indigo children kind of leadership figures who really start getting serious about like
leading the government and doing things like that because really that's what psychoanalysis
psychedelics were for going back into antiquity.
The reason that, you know, the priests of antiquity took this stuff is because it gave
them insights into the way into reality.
They could anticipate trends and a big part of how they do it too, which is something
I get to in the book, is that they regionalized it.
They had these ceremonies at temples so you'd have all these people come from all over and
they'd come, they'd have these trips and then they'd explain what they saw in their visions
and that would kind of explain subconsciously like things that they thought and how they
perceive the world.
And you could kind of build this map of like what everyone is thinking and the direction
that society is going in.
So it was this very advanced map making ceremony, I think, is what a psychedelic trip was in
a group.
It was, so you'd have these conversations with people and, you know, that's what confession
was when it came to priests, they would, you know, you get this confession and it was intelligence
gathering.
So these temple centers were places where people went to take psychedelic drugs, they
confessed, they told the priests about everything.
So the priest was taking these drugs and integrating all this information and trying not to have
biases and just see it for what it is.
And the psychedelics were just this way of deconstructing their own thoughts and not
getting stuck in any kind of paradigm.
I think, at least, that's the way that I see it and it seems like a really magnificent
system that probably worked pretty well.
And another thing that I kind of talk about in my book is that classical architecture
actually is probably more ancient than ancient Greece, probably goes back to the Semitic
and Anatolian regions, and that I basically trace one really big archaeological site to
King Solomon that is considered to be a Roman site.
But I trace it to King Solomon and actually, I'll just say it's Baalbek.
I think Baalbek was the temple of King Solomon in the Bible.
And I'm not the only person who thinks this, there's lots of people in Lebanon who just
say this.
This is what the oral tradition in Lebanon is.
It's that Baalbek is the temple of Solomon and they also call it the Tower of Babel.
And so the Eurocentric view that has been applied to the history of the Middle East
has erased so much history.
It has erased so much, it's remarkable.
And it's also kind of mycophobic because the Anglo-Saxon world is kind of very historically
afraid of mushrooms.
So this has caused us to totally black out a piece of this history that is, I think,
absolutely integral to the proper functioning of society.
What is the cause of that fear?
Well one is that some mushroom species will kill you.
So they're used as poisons in some places in antiquity.
And the British Empire probably had maybe a larger abundance or maybe there were more
assassinations that happened through the use of mushrooms, I'm not totally sure, but it's
definitely an Anglo thing.
And so when that fear just applied to the rest of history, you lose so much, you lose
so much.
It's really amazing.
And Gordon Lawson actually touches on this about the mycophobia of the Anglo-Saxon worldview
is actually what got him interested in his scholarship.
He's one of the first mushroom mycologists is that his wife was a Russian and she loved
mushrooms.
She picked a bunch of Amanita mysterias on their honeymoon and brought them like a gift,
like look, we have these drugs we can take and it's our honeymoon, we're going to get
wild and have a good time.
And he just flipped out and he lost his mind.
He's like, are you crazy?
These are going to kill us.
So that interaction fascinated him and basically started his career as a mycologist.
Why the hell did I have that reaction?
It was my honeymoon and she wasn't worried at all.
And also I think that part of that reaction too is the psychological effect that these
drugs have on some people.
If you're not willing to let go of those cultural biases that you have when you go in, you're
going to have a bad time.
You're going to have a very bad time.
You're going to question who you are, you're going to have all these really hard questions.
Which is the point.
And that's the point, exactly.
So that's part of the funny thing of this.
There's like this natural threshold and this natural barrier that keeps like certain people
out.
It's just this weird, I don't know.
That's the matrix.
That's the cage.
Yeah.
Right.
And on the other side of it, people have difficulty to define themselves, to identify themselves.
Yes, yes, yes, yeah.
So you got to be open to that, to not having all the answers right away.
If you're going to take this stuff and you want to do your research and you want to take
stuff that's not going to kill you if you can.
And you have to be careful because some of them are deadly.
If you pick the wrong mushroom and you're out in the forest, not every mushroom is going
to get you high and give you a good time.
Some of them will just kill you.
And so that's kind of part of the reason why the Anglo-Saxon world is a little more mycophobic.
What are the most significant examples of a psychedelic system, government, society,
civilization throughout history, according to your research?
I would say the Abrahamic religions, actually.
That's what I would say.
Maybe the colonial government in America as well.
The Freemasons seem to kind of carry some of that mushroom mysticism.
It seems that was kind of the primary vessel that brought it over to the United States.
But the Native Americans had their own traditions too.
But yeah, definitely the Old Testament government.
Basically the way that it worked is that with Moses, you had the tabernacle.
You had the high priest and you had the priest around the priest.
And the tabernacle was where basically people brought animals to be sacrificed to Yahweh.
But this was a form of actually paying taxes back then.
They were a nomadic society.
All their wealth was in these livestock animals.
So what they would do is they'd bring this and then everyone would have a feast on the
Sabbath.
I think it's Saturday for Jewish people, but it's not really correlated to our calendar
so it doesn't really matter.
But every seven days they'd have some kind of a feast.
So all the poor people would be able to eat.
It was a kind of redistribution of wealth and you could go to the priest if you had
a problem, if you were a poor person or let's say somebody committed a crime against you.
You could go to the priest and they'd sort it out.
The temple was a total governmental administrative place where people were taking hallucinogenic
drugs and that's just how the system works.
And it worked pretty well in those times.
Obviously, we're not going to bring sheep to the White House and have them slaughtered
and have everybody have a feast because that's just not going to work for us today.
But as a model, it worked back then and you can get those fundamental principles out of
that religion and you can apply it in a similar way.
There was charity.
There was some form of charity and Islam does a good job of this too.
They established the Zakat at least in the early days.
I think that Islam was largely corrupted pretty honestly and it basically became very non-psychedelic,
very authoritarian, very against the kind of...
Political.
Yeah, very political.
But for a little while, it seemed to really function well and I think that's why it grew
so quickly and it was adopted so quickly.
It congealed all these different religions and I think that it was probably more or less
acceptable to take some kind of hallucinogen.
When you look at Arabic art and Eastern art, very clearly has hallucinogenic influence.
The arabesque is these infinitely repeating patterns, very clearly something that's inspired
from these fractal geometric figures that you can see under the influence of these drugs
as far as I'm concerned.
Then you have drugs like a Syrian roux, particularly in Iran, still commonly used as an incense.
It's got an anti-depressive effect, but it also activates DMT.
Any kind of DMT in your regular food will get a slight activation from that incense.
You might not necessarily perceive it, but you might recognize it.
There's drugs all over the Middle East.
Drugs are a part of some cultures out there too.
Iran, still.
Yeah, sure.
Right, right, right.
Absolutely.
It's coming right from Afghanistan.
Right.
Yep, yep.
Our next door neighbor was actually, when I was growing up there, he was smoking it
and he would come through our house through air conditioning system.
My mom was getting so pissed and like this guy was smoking opium again.
No kidding.
Yeah, yeah.
There are places, like southern cities, there's one place, Kerman, especially, that when you
go to someone's house, if they want to respect you, they bring you tea and opium and it's
part of their customary.
Right, man.
I mean, yeah, those are traditions that probably go back a while, I'd imagine.
Yeah.
I mean, yeah, because why wouldn't you do that?
You have a guest over, you know, get them loaded up and having a good time so they're
not like judging you or like, you know, being an asshole.
Yeah, you don't do that because, you know, people who run the system, they're like, if
you do this shit, you don't want to go to a school or join the workforce because they're
like, why the fuck am I doing that?
I just sit outside and play flute and look at butterflies and watch the clouds go by.
It's a good way to live life.
Right.
Yeah.
I mean, personally, I take an attitude of like some moderation.
You know, I'm pretty moderate about my use.
But yeah, I mean, it's just been part of human culture forever.
And it's just ridiculous to have the taboos around it that have been around.
They're going away now, thankfully.
But yeah, I share that article with you about how employers in the United States now are
not requiring drug tests.
Amazon is one of them.
There's a couple other ones that are jumping on board with that.
For marijuana, at least.
So, you know, I know people from different countries who are, you know, like let's say
from Iran, the dude knows the Farsi language and knows the cultural context and stuff.
And therefore he could be considered an asset for CIA.
But the problem is he's done a little too much asset.
Sure.
Right.
So these are not good points of government because somebody who's done a lot of psychedelic
experiences could be very useful to CIA, for example, you know, the kind of perspective
that they're bringing.
But I know for a fact that they're saying marijuana, you shouldn't have smoked for
the past 12 months.
I'm using CIA as an extreme example because they say it on their website.
But other drugs, they're going to have further conversations like, I wonder what other drugs
are.
For example, they were like, what have you done, DMT, asset, blah, blah, okay, dude,
we can't work with you, you know, right off the bat.
And the FBI, as I mentioned, they were looking for hackers, but they couldn't find anybody
who wasn't smoking weed.
So they dropped that requirement.
Right, right, yeah, yeah.
That's interesting.
I mean, I mean, the whole Silicon Valley thing too, technology as this kind of extension
of our, of our evolution too, it makes a lot of sense.
So what you were saying earlier, yeah, I mean, the people in Silicon Valley have been experimenting
with these drugs.
I mean, you know, LSD, I mean, that's where the hippie movement really kind of took off.
I mean, in the 1960s, and that culture has kind of been there in the subculture, I mean,
the whole time.
So yeah, it's been going on for a long time.
And that's, that's something that bugs me to high heaven when I hear conservative people
go on these shows and just like talk about how, you know, psychedelic drugs are a menace.
Hippies were a menace.
Like, are you, are you crazy?
Hippies created this world that we live in, in a lot of ways.
Yeah, they got straight and they went to work and they, you know, but they still, you know,
smoke joints on the side and they were, they still kept that, that certain kind of rebelliousness
even in their character.
And that's part of the whole startup culture is breaking away from that business world.
And you get a couple people together with computer and you write up some code and you
create your own thing.
I mean, this is like this weird, like hippie thing that emerged in Silicon Valley.
I mean, it's totally like values from the 1960s applied to these, these startups that
come out of these psychedelic drugs and this, this disregard for the official way of doing
things on these kind of hierarchical authoritarian systems.
So it's people totally discredit, not just in American history, but also going back into
antiquity, the profound role that these drugs had on the development of our thinking and
the development of our governments and of our technology.
I mean, it's really remarkable.
I mean, I wouldn't be surprised if like more than 50% of like all technological innovations
were from people who had some kind of drug experiences or something.
Scientific discoveries.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Cause it gets you out of your head.
It makes you think about things differently.
And you know, it's a great catalyst for, for that.
If you have the right mentality for it, you know, but it's also, you know, it's good for
recreation too, but it's, but it can produce a lot of good for society.
And it's so annoying to me when you, when these, these right wing conservative guys
just get so serious about ridiculous and they're very blind, both about technology and about
psychedelics because you know, you don't have to go that far to see them.
More veterans are dying out of the battlefield here in the United States than they have died
in battlefield and a lot of it is because they don't have access to the right kind
of medicine.
You know, there's a documentary made about these two veterans who came back and one of
them got hooked on, I think, opium and they ended up doing ayahuasca.
I think one of them did, or two of them did ayahuasca.
One of them did MDMA, MDMA therapy.
And they're like, I can't believe it that how much it has helped.
And all those years that we got hooked on pharmaceuticals and all this chemical nonsense
that, you know, basically little by little destroyed us.
Right.
Yeah.
People are waking up and they're seeing these alternatives and people are talking about
it too.
And so it's spreading this, the awareness that, you know, the corporatized, you know,
way of doing things in America is just doesn't work at all.
It just doesn't fundamentally work and that there's other alternatives and that really
the 1960s, the people in the 1960s were onto something, but that whole revolution was put
down.
I think we almost had this kind of grand revolution in the 60s, like, but it was all put down
by the CIA, basically by the deep state.
You had JFK get assassinated, Martin Luther King, Malcolm X, a lot of other people were
literally assassinated for having the wrong views and the wrong ideas who worked their
way into positions of massive social and cultural influence.
I don't think, I think that it's going to happen again, but I don't, I think it's going
to be so widespread and the, I think that the government's ability to muster some kind
of militarized response to this is going to be nil.
There's going to be no way that they're going to be able to respond to the, this kind of
what I think is going to be a resurgent psychedelic revolution.
I really think it's going to happen.
I think it's, we're in the, in the throes of it to a certain extent now, because I mean,
really people kind of adhere to the conservative party to some extent, but in another 10 or
20 years, most of the conservative party line is just going to be over.
It's going to be gone.
It's going to have no relevance.
Conservative party, you're talking about Republicans?
Yeah, the conservative Republicans.
Yeah.
It's going to be pretty much over.
There's a couple of young people who are kind of still carrying the line, but like, or toeing
the line, I guess, but it's, it's not going to have influence.
The religious people are going to gravitate towards, if anything, I think like a version
of like Orthodox Christianity, which is like an Eastern form of Christianity.
But the whole neocon thing is politically just so reprehensible.
I think it's going to be over very soon.
I mean, that's my, my take on it at least, but you mentioned six season revolution and
all that in the series of books that I also like to mention in this conversation is the
psychedelic experience by Timothy Leary and manual based on the Tibetan book of the dead.
It's really interesting, especially if you read it on acid, quite a journey.
He's the guy, you know, he, uh, his, his, uh, have you read his autobiography?
I don't think so.
No, no, it has the best title.
It's flashbacks.
That's the title of it.
It's so funny.
It makes me laugh every time I think about it, flashbacks, super funny.
Do you, um, do you feel politically homeless?
Oh, for sure.
I mean, in some way I, at the same time, I'm not super political.
I guess I, the one way, you know, watching these podcasts is very heartening to me.
I think that it's not political yet, but like all there's a lot of podcasts, Joe Rogan,
Jordan Peterson, you know, Jocko Willink, these guys who are kind of, you know, right
leaning in some ways, but not necessarily they had, they're open to a lot of different
ideas and ways of looking at the world.
Yeah.
They look right leaning because the left has gone insane.
Yes, precisely.
Yes.
Yes.
And, um, yeah, the, I mean, there is no left anymore.
I mean, there really isn't.
It's just, these are just corporate sphuges is all it is and liberty.
That's what it is.
Yeah.
It's amazing.
It's amazing to me.
I mean, I live in Minneapolis, so I mean, it's amazing to me.
What I've, what I've seen is just like, it's just amazing.
Like how ridiculous the whole, you know, BLM crap is, it's just so ridiculous.
They're corporate stooges.
I mean, this organization is paid for by these international organizations.
It's I mean, leftism used to be about contesting authority and contesting, uh, corporate authority
and overreach.
And it has nothing to do with that anymore.
It's all about towing.
Yeah.
It's bizarre.
It's totally bizarre.
Yeah.
And I don't know, man.
I mean, one thing I'm optimistic about is that there's lots of like, you know, uh, mixed
race and minority people who are openly speaking out against this, like, yo, this does not
represent me at all.
And that is a good sign.
Like the democratic party has totally alienated itself.
Um, and yeah, I'd prefer the conservative view on things.
I just wish they'd be a little bit less, uh, insane about some of their biblical positions.
I think that is, I literally think that there's a mental illness and conservativism.
That's just, that is just crazy.
Well, I mean, any kind of a fundamentalism, you know, this is a part of the story that
children who went to pleasure Island have begun turning into donkeys.
So some people are saying that, Hey, the solution is in the belly of the whale.
So we got to go back to the belly of the whale, where, which is, you know, fundamentalism
and all those things.
But these people forget that Pinocchio and Geppetto got out of the whale by lighting
the fire and fire is a piece of technology.
So they ignore that part altogether that, Hey, we got to get to the whale and we got
to be safe.
No, you're not going to be saved.
That's a problem.
But when you hold onto something in this ocean of uncertainty that we're swimming in, you
know, you're holding onto it because you need a sense of identity.
You need a sense of purpose.
You need a sense of direction, ethics and morality.
And I think that is completely outdated and broken.
The way that we have treated it in a conventional sense of the way and psychedelics again, I'm
not suggesting anybody to do it or not do it.
I I've done it many, many times for many, many years and it's done wonders for me.
But I also had experiences that I could consider, you know, bad trips or whatever, but they
were all tough ones.
Yeah.
It's all part of the puzzle.
You know, you realize that in hindsight that actually I'm glad that I went through that
kind of experience.
Exactly.
Yeah, for sure.
Yep.
Yep.
It's it's part of the process of learning how to handle it too.
And because, you know, especially those first ones, I think are real tough for people because
we're indoctrinated in our culture.
I mean, we're totally fed bull crap.
And so those first encounters you have with psychedelics are going to challenge you for
sure, because it's it's going to show you how much this our society is bullshit.
I mean, it's I mean, at least that's that's kind of my reflection on my earlier experiences
was that it really kind of it was kind of disassociative in some ways.
But once you kind of work through it and I took a break from it for a while and I kind
of reflected on it, I realized, you know, like, yeah, there's a lot of stuff that I
do in my personal life that's just like attached to this like fake cultural edifice, you know,
that that I don't need to do, you know.
So it's a part is a part of everyone's own process.
And it's something that you have to figure out for yourself and you got to be kind of
brave if you're going to do it.
And so do your research, read Terrence McKenna, you know, that's that's a good place to start,
at least.
Yeah, really.
McKenna and Alan Watts, I went through a couple of years of just these two.
If I want to consider anybody as my guru, I don't believe in that concept, but these
two would be it.
You know, it's just.
Yeah.
Same.
Yeah.
Same.
Yeah.
Terrence, for me, for sure.
Yeah.
Yeah.
How old were you when you had your first experience?
And with what substance?
I was 18.
And I took some LSD with a couple of friends.
Yeah, it was pretty interesting.
I was in art school, so it's you know, it was kind of all around there.
Yeah.
So in LSD, I found to be a little bit more aggressive than psilocybin.
I think psilocybin is a lot less aggressive and a lot less analytical as well.
LSD is very analytical.
So I think psilocybin is probably a better first run.
If I could go back and change, I probably would have done psilocybin first just to kind
of warm up a little bit because LSD is just, I found it to be really intense.
But yeah.
All right.
Adam's book is called Eden and Enthugen, Psychedelic History from the Bronze Age to the 1960s.
It's available for free on archive.org.
And I'm showing you guys now that you can flip through the pages digitally and you can
even listen to it being read by an AI voice.
Are you aware of that on archive.org?
I did not know that.
It's just like auto, auto-generated voice.
Is that new?
I hadn't even tried that.
Yeah.
Interesting.
I just tested it before coming on.
Oh, okay.
So yeah, it's working.
Hey, what were some of the main sources of your research for the book?
Well, basically, the majority of the book is actually a commentary just on Old Testament
verses.
So you'll see an Old Testament verse.
I'll give some commentary on it, and it's just to cruise you through like a couple hundred
years of biblical history and just give all the important psychedelic moments and points
and kind of tie it back to Terrence McKenna.
There's a couple other people that I reference periodically.
One of my favorites is Michael Hudson.
He's a Minnesotan too.
Michael Hudson did this scholarship on ancient Sumerian economies.
And basically, he did this Harvard study with these Harvard researchers, and they analyzed
the cuneiform tablets, and they figured out how the economy in these ancient Sumerian
city-states worked.
And it's really interesting.
It's very counterintuitive how it worked.
It's really interesting.
And so I incorporate a little bit of that into the book of how these ancient temple
complex cultures manage their economies, because they had managed economies.
It wasn't like barter and trade or anything like that.
The ancient Sumerians had priests, and they set prices.
And the temple was also a storehouse, as well as a place where they took psychedelics.
So it was this all-purpose marketplace, government headquarters, religious temple, is really
an interesting way of managing a society, really.
And it kind of all makes sense that that's actually where markets originated.
It was in these temples, in these storehouses, where you stored grain, where you stored precious
metals, you stored all kinds and fabrics as well.
And that it was psychedelic people who, again, were managing this.
He doesn't do the psychedelic thing, but I tie it into my general analysis of how the
Bible worked.
And it just makes sense that you'd have...
These were religious centers as well.
So yes, of course, you're going to have these people taking these drugs there.
So I tie my theories into some prominent scholars like Michael Hudson in unique ways that haven't
really been done yet, but I don't know.
It's a little bit dense, and it's really just...
It's kind of for the academic heads up there in some ways.
And you're working on a new book.
Yeah.
The second one is a follow-up, because this book is 600 pages, but it just gets up to
the Book of First Kings in the Old Testament.
So the next book is going to really cruise through Christianity, Islam, colonial America,
and some of the Greek and Roman legends as well, because you have psychedelic stuff going
on there.
So what the point is, is to show the continuity of the psychedelic system of government that
starts with Terence McKenna's nomads, and then it turns into ancient Egypt, and then
you get the Israelites, and then you kind of just kind of follow the thing through.
And you can see this culture emerging and re-emerging.
It's really, really interesting.
And I think you can follow points of collapse when people abandon this lifestyle of taking
these hallucinogens, because that's what keeps you in touch with reality in some way.
Or at least you have to have a few people who are doing it periodically.
It's not like they have to do it all the time.
You just have to have that.
You have to have some people who are reevaluating things and saying, okay, wait, maybe we're
not doing things right here or there or whatever.
So once the society becomes decadent, they stop caring about that kind of self-reflective
instinct, that's when you get collapsed.
I think that's what we're dealing with today.
So I think it's totally relevant to what our society is going through.
Yeah.
On the second book, so you're basically exploring the psychedelic systems of governance.
Yeah, it gets a little bit more detailed because as you move forward in history, you get more
records and references.
One of the interesting things that I found recently was Mormonism.
A lot of people, South Park, for example, did all kinds of jokes about Mormonism just
being like literally insane.
This guy's crazy, he had visions, God was talking to him.
But looking at it again, it's just remarkable.
The guy had these relationships with these Native Americans.
He had these visionary experiences and it seems that he appropriated some of these interesting
psychedelic symbols from the early colonial period and he was very much about herbal healing.
He had an herbalist in his kind of cult and he was very much about herbal healing.
There's some sculptural reliefs that indicate some different psychedelics.
So saving some of that for the second book, it's really interesting, but you see it everywhere.
If you really look for it, this is at the center of these religious movements and it's
interesting.
I mean, Utah now is like a totally kind of unique state.
It's a Mormon state.
It has its own governing principles.
It has its own religious sense of orientation.
So you have potential to do something like what Joseph Smith did and recreate some kind
of cultural renaissance with psychedelics.
So you can kind of look at these historical figures and you can model some potential outcome
of a new emergent kind of civilization.
So it's kind of interesting to read through history that way and see those models, I think.
Mormons are very interesting because of the way that they define God, that God is basically
an enlightened man, so anybody can become a God.
And because of that, they also have Mormon transhumanist association.
The more fundamentalist Mormons, they're not very friendly towards them.
So it's not like they're united, but this definition of the core, their God has allowed
for a lot of different innovation for lack of a better word within that context, within
that religious context.
Right.
It's such an interesting religion.
I mean, some of the stuff that they believe is just so far out, I just laugh every time
I just...
I mean, one of the things was, apparently Joseph Smith said that there were people living
on the moon that looked like Quakers who are like...
It doesn't surprise me.
Yeah.
He's like said the craziest things and I'm like, yes, exactly.
I've thought about converting to Mormonism just because it's so awesome, it's so out
there and so crazy.
It's great.
I think it's so funny.
Hey, Adam, where can our audience follow your work?
And you already said what's next for you because that's also the question that I ask along
with this one.
Right.
Next for you is your new book and where can people follow your future works and future
endeavors?
Well, I upload onto Internet Archive.
So you can follow me on Internet Archive if you just look up Eden and Entheogens there.
That's basically where I upload all my stuff.
So if you want to keep in touch and read the book or whatever, you can comment there too.
And there's also an email address in the...
Like on one of the first pages of the book, Eden and Entheogens at protonmail.com, I think.
So yeah.
So that's probably the best way to get in touch if you want to.
I'm not like super savvy with social media.
I do it a little bit, but I'm not like, I don't know, I'm not building a following or
building anything like that.
Well this was awesome, man.
Thanks for coming up and thanks for reaching out.
Hopefully I'll have you back for your second book.
We talk about the images and some more that you sent as well.
Yeah, that'd be cool, man.
Yeah.
I had a great time.
Thanks for having me on.
Yeah.
Let me ask you the final question I ask all my guests.
If you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you say
is the worst thing humanity has done and what would you say is their greatest achievement?
That's such a hard question.
I don't know, because I don't like to do the absolutes too much.
The worst thing, oh my gosh, just, I don't know, the past 50 years of American culture
and civilization basically since they destroyed the 1960s I think is probably one of the worst
things that's ever happened.
It's just spiritually it's just decimated so much.
People are smart and they find a way to work around it, but yeah, there's been a really
severe system of control in place I think basically since the Nixon administration at
the very least.
I think it probably goes back a little further, but that's the worst.
The best thing that we've ever produced, oh man, that's a tough question.
I think it's part of the size of the 1960s, but I think computers are just marvelous.
I just think computers are just incredible.
Some of the coolest things as far as material things we've produced, I'd say computers,
but also I might say classical architecture because I just thought I love classical architecture,
so somewhere in between there, yeah.
Thank you.
