Man is a tightrope between ape and overman.
A tightrope is not somewhere you want to stay, okay?
It is not a stable place.
There is no human nature that defines the limits of what we can be in the way that various
animals have a species being that they can't do anything about.
As you put it earlier in our conversation, the quote unquote nature of man is inextricable
from technology and technological development.
Technology made us.
We were technological before we were human.
The use of technology by primates is what created the human being.
Dr. Georgiani, welcome back to Neohuman Podcast, less than a year ago, but few episodes apart
because I haven't done too many of these podcasts.
Welcome.
It's a pleasure to be with you again, Agha.
Yeah, absolutely.
How have you been?
I believe you're back in New York, New York City, which for the reasons that maybe we
get to it, I consider it to be the capital of woke at this point or whatever that is
going on philosophically and spiritually on the other side.
How have you been?
How are you dealing with all these limitations and restrictions and everything that's been
happening since the last time that we spoke?
Well, it's hard and it affects me deeply.
The weather is still nice here, so in terms of restaurants, I can sit outside and not
have to submit to the vaccine mandate, but that's not the issue.
What's the issue is that I see the city that I grew up in and that I love being totally
destroyed, having its character completely deformed.
This is not the spirit of New York.
New York was the toughest, grittiest city in the country, if not the world.
To see this kind of cowering and fearfulness, I mean, I don't know what happened to New
Yorkers.
I don't know who these people are that surround me right now.
But what I tell people when they say, you should move to the South or you should move
to Eastern Europe or whatever, is that I have the kind of relationship to this city that
Socrates had to Athens.
I will probably die here before I abandon my post.
So we'll see what happens.
But New York, to me, is a city like Babylon once was, like Rome was.
It's a city that may die many times but come back with a vengeance.
And I do think that our worst days are probably ahead of us, but that this city will rise
from out of the waters and from out of the waves and from out of the ashes.
And it will be a phoenix.
Yeah, I think it's important to consider because a lot of people are saying that these people
are incompetent, that anything that they touch turns into dust and trash.
But it's also, I think, important to consider that this could all be intentional as a matter
of treason that people who are pushing these cities to fall apart are doing it just so
they can buy the dip, basically.
Everything crashes and these people in New York, de Blasio and his people, just buying
up the city and creating this kind of centrally driven hub of whatever kind of a social experiment
that they want to force upon the people.
You know, I don't mean to say something so out there, so early in our conversation, but
I can't stop myself in response to the question or in response to what you just said.
I have known some of the top remote viewers, people who worked at the Stanford Research
Institute program that was funded by the CIA and then by the DOD to gather intelligence
using extrasensory perception.
And one of the things that these people would do is they would look at future events and
they did that for counterterrorism purposes and other objectives of the US government.
But sometimes they would just engage in remote viewing targets decades into the future, particularly
having to do with anticipating and preparing for natural catastrophes and so forth.
And one person that I spoke with at some length was the trainer for the entire CIA remote
viewing program.
And he and his group had actually remote viewed the year 2050.
And they had seen that all of the cities were emptied out and people were living on isolated
neo-agrarian homesteads in the countryside.
And when I asked him why this was the case, he said that they were terrified of disease
and they did not allow anyone other than their close friends and family onto their property.
And so the cities were still there.
It's not like there had been a nuclear war.
And in fact, he said that criminals lived in the cities because it was a place where
you could evade surveillance and control.
They were like squatting in the cities.
But the cities were otherwise emptied out.
And so I think that you're right that on even a much higher level or in a much more nefarious
way than you suggested, this is all being done very deliberately.
And New York City in particular is being targeted as sort of the beta test for this entire program
because New York City is potentially such a bastion of resistance against the kind of
world order that they want to bring.
I know a lot of people on the right don't see it that way, but I think they lack a long
view of history and they lack an understanding of the nuances of the character of the city.
This could become a bastion of mass resistance against the certain, this place could become
a bastion of mass resistance against the kind of totalitarian regime that they want to ultimately
unfold on a planetary scale.
And so I think that their first objective has to be to destroy cities like New York
and to isolate people as much as possible, to make it so that all of their communication
is through cyberspace, which is a medium that they control entirely, and make it harder
for people to gather en masse, you know, face to face.
So yes, I'm very concerned about that.
So let's stay on New York for a second.
I want to talk to you about your book, obviously, but I think this is very important and it
could be even related as you already make some kind of a connection.
This cancel culture that has been taking out statues and canceling people, they've replaced
all those things by one thing, as far as I know, and that is one statue that they put
in New York in the Rockefeller Center called, called the Oracle, which is this massive,
I don't know if it's still there, it's this massive black figure who's holding a flame.
And this is significant.
And I really wanted to talk to you about it for a month, because this is happening at
the same place that there was a statue of Prometheus that has been placed there, I would
assume for you as the founder of Prometheism.
This place should be a sacred place that I don't even know what kind of a term to use
violated or whatever, but I think this is extremely important to understand where these
people are coming from spiritually, philosophically.
And so please tell me what you think about that.
How do you see it and whether or not this statue is still there and what is the significance
of it all?
What they did is not some, you know, kitsch art industry gimmick.
This was done very deliberately and I'll explain to you why I know that's the case.
If you look at this monstrosity that they set up at the opening of, at the opening,
the mouth of Rockefeller Plaza, right, so that when you stand in front of this quote
unquote oracle, it blocks the view of the Prometheus statue and the entire plaza.
You can't see anything of what's behind it.
It towers in front of you, blocks that majestic architectural design and the sculpture of
Prometheus that the plaza leads down to.
Is it still there?
You know what?
To tell you the truth, I was so appalled that I haven't been back there since I really could
not bring myself to go back there, because as you said, to me, it's a sacred place.
And you know, if you notice the title of my first book, Prometheus and Atlas, it comes
from the fact that there's a statue of Prometheus and a statue of Atlas at Rockefeller Plaza.
And the opening paragraph of Prometheus and Atlas evokes that place as a kind of, you
know, navel of the world.
And so I have not been able to bring myself to go back there since.
Hopefully by the time I do, that will have been removed.
In any case, if you look at the symbolism of this statue, he has the torch of Prometheus
in his hand.
So this figure has stolen the fire back from Prometheus and this figure has an African
mask on, but it's actually Zeus.
Zeus enthroned, wearing an African mask, having stolen the fire back from Prometheus.
So what this statue actually means, and this is lost on the BLM ninis who are celebrating
it, is that Zeus, the tyrannical godfather, head of the caste system, head of the system
of slavery and oppression and, you know, racial hierarchy and so on and so forth, is using
a black mask to steal the fire of liberation back from us rebels in order to refound that
system of oppression and take his throne again, but this time wearing the mask of social justice.
That's what that sculpture actually means.
So it's not even a head because a lot of people were like deformed head, giant head.
It is a mask.
It's a traditional African mask on Zeus's face and the figure is Zeus on his throne.
The sculpture of Prometheus at Rockefeller Center is about Prometheus challenging the
throne of Zeus and stealing the fire of the light of scientific knowledge and the forge
of technological innovation, stealing that fire from Olympus and giving it as a gift
to mankind for the sake of human empowerment.
That's what the sculpture of Prometheus is about and in fact, there's a quote from Aeschylus
above that sculpture in Rockefeller Plaza that makes it very explicit, right?
Whereas this monstrosity they put there to block the view of the Prometheus statue is
about putting Zeus back on his throne again and making sure that the fire is taken from
us, all justified by an African mask.
Wow.
When you say they, who exactly are you referring to?
We're elites who are using Black Lives Matter as a vehicle in order to establish a system
where knowledge is secreted away and hidden from us again and where there's basically
a neo-agrarian feudal state put into place to keep masses obedient, submissive and ignorant.
Yes, centralized interests basically, which is global.
Hierarchical and centralized.
Right.
Hierarchical and centralized.
So I think this is a good pathway to get into your new book, Congratulations, by the way,
Closer Encounters that came out I believe in August and it's been a number one in a
variety of categories on Amazon.
I'm showing the hardcover page of Amazon but it's also available in paperback and audiobook
maybe it's also available?
Not yet.
Hopefully soon.
I'll get Artos working on that.
So let's talk about your intention for writing this book now and then we get to whether or
not there is some kind of a grand intention or grand plan and objective that is being
played on this planet and beyond this planet that it's all basically coming unmasked in
this period that we're experiencing.
Right.
So the prompt for my finally writing about this subject after having studied it for 20
years on the side of everything else that I've been doing was the UAP report, which
we knew from late last year that it was going to be released this summer and I correctly
anticipated that this report would be a monstrous lie.
And so I wanted to make sure to synthesize and crystallize my own interpretation and
reflections on close encounters and have it ready as a response to this deception that's
being promulgated.
This is a report about UFO that the US government released after a lot of anticipation and build
up basically.
That's right.
UAP preliminary assessment is what it was called.
And look, the mandate for this report, which came from Congress and was spearheaded by
people like Marco Rubio from the perspective of national security because our highest level
naval assets were being overflown on a regular basis by these unidentified vehicles.
The mandate of this report was that all intelligence that the Navy, the Air Force and whatever
other branch of the US government had on these quote unquote unidentified aerial phenomena
ought to be volunteered to Congress and an assessment should be made as to what these
phenomena are.
And when we got the actual report, we saw that first of all, they limited the database
upon which they based their conclusions to a period starting from the early 2000s until
the present.
Secondly, although the mandate specifically instructed the Office of Naval Intelligence,
because most of these sightings recently have involved US aircraft carriers and other naval
vessels, specifically instructed Office of Naval Intelligence to hand over everything
it knew about UFOs.
None of that is acknowledged in this report.
The Office of Naval Intelligence has an archive going back 70 years, full of hundreds and
hundreds of UFO reports, including reports of what they call USOs, unidentified submersible
or submarine objects, which are UFOs that come up from out of the water or go back down
into the oceans.
And they've tracked these things going at incredible speeds on sonar from submarines.
They have hundreds of reports going back decades, and many of them have already been made public.
And yet, in this UAP report and this UAP preliminary assessment, they refuse to acknowledge any
of that.
It's as if this thing only started happening in the early 2000s.
And they make some brief mention of how, well, previously, we kind of noticed some things
that we didn't really have any good data yet.
Well, bullshit.
So, first of all, they're covering up 70 years of their own data.
Second, this report is a disaster from the standpoint of national security for the following
reason.
Up until now, it's been assumed since the Condon report, the concluded Project Bluebook
in 1969, where the University of Colorado came in and under the chairmanship of Professor
Condon did an assessment of the Bluebook data, since that report in 1969, it's been assumed
by, I don't know, the general public, but also by the governments of our adversaries
that the United States has secretly not only been studying this phenomenon, but perhaps
the Pentagon has been reverse engineering technology, right?
So the impression is, well, you know, the Americans know what's...
Not only do they know what's going on, they're probably developing some deterrence capability
with respect to UFOs.
This is the impression by Russians and Chinese and...
Russians, Chinese, right?
And that's the impression we will want them to have.
You want your adversaries to believe that A, not only do you know what it is, B, you're
developing countermeasures and perhaps you have technology based on it that could outmaneuver
them in any war.
So this report comes out and it says, well, gee, you know, we actually don't know what
these things are.
Some significant percentage of these are genuinely unidentified, not only unidentified, they're
unidentifiable.
No matter what we bring to bear on analyzing this, we don't know what these things are.
They outperform all of the military hardware that we have and folks, they're not manufactured
by us.
And by the way, it could be Russia or China.
How stupid are you from a national security perspective that you come out and say that
publicly, even if it were true, which it isn't.
You don't say that when you're responsible for the security of the nation.
Right?
I mean, this country has a larger military budget than the next 10 countries put together,
including Russia and China.
You mean to tell the American taxpayer, right, a trillion dollars, you know, of their money
of which you just burned in Afghanistan, but that's another issue.
You mean to tell the American taxpayer that with that kind of military budget that they're
funding, maybe China and Russia have manufactured these vehicles that are doing end runs around
our Air Force, you know, jets and our aircraft carriers.
And we're completely, you know, we are subject to the penetration of our most secure air
space with impunity by these objects.
And you're leaving open the possibility that they're actually hardware manufactured by
our adversaries.
That's a does that look the U.S. government, frankly, has lost legitimacy over that alone.
That is an abdication of the sovereignty of the United States in and of itself, regardless
of any other factors.
I mean, what is even the meaning of U.S. government now?
Because you're saying national security interests, but the interests of certain people within
the so-called U.S. government is completely different and not aligned at all with absolute
majority of Americans.
I mean, how can you mess up so badly in Afghanistan?
And then the only place that you've had a plan and schedule and everything for was to
bring tens of thousands of Afghanis without being vetted into U.S. soil and into the U.S.
territory.
I mean, it's so obvious that this is not a group of people who are collecting taxpayers
money, hard-earned money, while looking down at them and serving some other interests.
I don't know if they're bought out by the Chinese or whoever, but they're definitely
not aligned with the interests of America as you and I and a lot of other people would
consider that term to have any kind of a definition of meaning, America.
Look, tomorrow is September 11th, tomorrow.
You know, in the past 20 years in Afghanistan, the United States has supposedly been fighting
the Taliban and supposedly been trying to build a relatively secular Afghan civilian
government and give education to women and so on and so forth, right?
This is the story that we're told.
But if you actually go back to the beginning of the Afghan Civil War in 1978-79, you see
that what the United States did was they set up a base in Pakistan, the Arabic name of
which was Al-Qaeda, the base, and they brought Saudis and other Salafis and Wahabis to Pakistan
and sent them via Waziristan into Afghanistan to fight not just against the Soviet Union,
but to dominate other factions of the Afghan resistance like the Northern Alliance that
was led by Ahmad Shah Massoud.
One, I don't know, it was, what was it, within days, I think, of 9-11, the CIA assassinated
Ahmad Shah Massoud in Afghanistan to make sure that the Northern Alliance would not be a
viable force once the US became engaged in Afghanistan.
And so instead of fighting the Taliban for the past 20 years, which is the facade that's
been presented to us, what the United States did not just over the last 20 years, but frankly
since the beginning of the Afghan Civil War, is it took a group of uneducated, poorly organized
Talibs, religious students, mercenary religious students, and it put them on steroids by bringing
well-funded, well-armed Saudi and other Salafist forces into Afghanistan and creating this
super Taliban, which it has now successfully taken over the whole country, with US weapons
and equipment and...conveniently paid $85 billion to arm this mock-up Afghan military
that would then lay down all of its hardware, its attack helicopters, its tanks, everything,
so that the Taliban could be armed to the teeth with state-of-the-art American military
hardware paid for by the taxpayer, the same taxpayer that is being told that maybe China
and Russia are manufacturing flying saucers that outperform anything that our Air Force
and our Navy have.
What kind of government is this?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think a lot of people are asking that question now, which is, you know, it's terrible
what's happening, but it's also kind of in some kind of a desperate, twisted way, maybe
it can be seen as a silver lining, because when they're becoming so covert and so aggressive,
so obviously, it just shows to me, at least, that they're desperate and their narrative
is falling apart, and therefore they're just using intimidation and force and coercion
to force people to follow the narrative.
You know, I wish that were true.
I would love that to be the case.
Unfortunately, I think that what's actually going on is that there's a deliberate attempt
being made to dismantle the United States, and we've talked about this in other contexts.
I think that from 1945 to 1947, when we brought over those thousands of, you know, the brightest,
most industrious Nazis that Germany produced, and we embedded them at the deepest layers
of what became the military industrial complex, and we went and imported the entire East German,
I'm sorry, the entire East European spy network of Nazi Germany, the Galen Organization, into
the OSS and created the CIA, we wound up with a deep state in this country that never owed
its allegiance to the American people.
The objective of that, frankly, fascist deep state was to destroy the Soviet Union.
It was to use the American industrial and economic power, this engine of industry in
the United States, to defeat Soviet communism, which was its primary adversary.
And lo and behold, within a decade of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, we get
September 11th and the global war on terror, the American invasion of Afghanistan, right?
And what an irony it will be if the graveyard of the Soviet Union, namely Afghanistan, also
becomes the graveyard of the United States.
And you know, within a few years after this fiasco in Afghanistan, the United States disintegrates
the way that the Soviet Union disintegrated within a couple of years of the Soviet withdrawal
from Afghanistan.
Probably harder, considering the amount of weapons and the kind of division that exists
in this country.
Much harder, because you see, look, Russia was still an ethnically and culturally cohesive
entity, even though they lost control over Kazakhstan and even Ukraine and so forth.
You know, the Russians have an ethos and an ethnos.
America is so internally divided that if the United States disintegrates, we're going to
see a horrific civil war in North America.
All kinds of conflict over resources, ethnic conflicts, you know, militarized class warfare
and so forth.
And so, yeah, I think the United States is going to fall harder than the Soviet Union.
But you know, to go back to your point, or your, I don't know, speculation, hypothesis-
My coping.
Yeah, I didn't want to put it that way.
But it's that I wish what you were saying is true.
The thing is, I think it's by design.
They're doing these absurdly, you know, self-destructive things because the people who are ultimately
designing these policies actually want to see America fail.
They have turned on the United States from inside and they're now transitioning to a
model of world order where China is used as the dominant vehicle for achieving their objectives.
Not the United States.
So what you said about you can't even recognize New Yorkers, I think the same can be said
about humanity in large, what's happening in Canada, in Australia, in specific.
And you see it a lot of people, not only that they're not doing anything against it, they're
rationalizing it just because they don't want to take any kind of an action.
Where are we headed?
Because what you're saying, and what I see, as I said, you know, there is a coping side
of like, well, maybe this is the case, I don't know, but based on what I'm also observing
with respect to humanity, there is not going to be any kind of a well-defined opposition
against this incredibly focused and vicious kind of an attack on individualism.
Would you say that this is ultimately an attack on individualism?
Most definitely, and so that's why I focused my response on articulating a form of individualism
that is not spiritually bankrupt and materialistic.
One of the problems with the West, definitely from, you know, the 20th century onwards,
is that the Western emphasis on the liberty of the individual and on, you know, the autonomy
of the individual with respect to, you know, state power has been almost inextricably fused
with a kind of soulless materialism, right?
I mean, capitalism functioned as a kind of vehicle to free the individual to some extent,
but capitalism also degraded, you know, the human experience by hollowing out all higher
orienting values and by turning the individual into a consummate consumer, right?
And so I think if we're going to extricate ourselves from this situation, we need to
articulate a vision of individualism that is spiritually rooted and that has some higher
aims or goals and that can reorient the developmental trajectory of our whole civilization, that
can give man a sense of purpose and meaning again, while at the same time protecting the
individual from collectivism and from, you know, totalitarian state power.
So that's, you know, effectively what I'm trying to achieve with this Promethean vision
that I've set forth in my writings.
We absolutely need something like this because the only side, I see this wokeism and all
that, whatever you want to call it, as a replacement for religion.
This hollowing of the individual of any kind of anything other than the surface has been
done from my perspective is specifically to get rid of the concept of religion and quote
unquote God, just so state can become the higher power and the absolute authority.
But the thing is the only replacement for it at this point that I see there is some
kind of a backlash against the system is evangelical fundamentalist Christian rights that they're
hell bent as we see right now.
I mean, I'm not sure if this is a very good timing to push abortion into the narrative
when you're a few days away from the recall election in California and, you know, maybe
a year away from absolute tyranny to take over United States and all over the world
if there is no any kind of organized backlash.
And yet we are kind of stuck between this wokeism or Christian fundamentalism that now
it energizes certain base, certain part of the base of the Republicans to take over the
House, take over the Congress and take over the presidency they're saying in 2022 and
2024.
That's absolutely right.
You know, if something isn't done about it, what we're going to see within a decade is
the fracturing of the United States, some kind of a second civil war that results in
a neo Confederacy, which is theocratic in nature, where we're going to see a biblical
republic come from out of the South and, oh, what a wonderful alternative to wokeism, right?
I mean, talk about being between a rock and a hard place.
And so, you know, we need to really get on this and begin preparing rapidly from now
to field a third way, another alternative, hopefully from out of the libertarian Western
States of America, you know, the Wild West, not including the West Coast.
But you know, there is a significant segment of the red states that are not evangelical
conservatives and that are more libertarian in their orientation.
And you know, while I certainly don't agree with Ayn Rand on many things, and, you know,
I have big problems with her objectivism, after all, remember that the vision of Atlas
was shrugged of a kind of, you know, utopia of liberty was based in the Western United
States, you know, gulch, gulch, Atlantis, quote unquote, was actually, you know, it
was in Westworld.
And I think that's a place that, you know, we need to very seriously think about turning
into some bastion of resistance against, you know, this, the machinations of these totalitarians
and that as America begins to collapse, as the United States begins to disintegrate,
we have to make sure that the center of gravity becomes that part of America and not, you
know, Dixie, not the Bible Belt.
That's a strategic objective that needs to be taken very seriously right now.
It's interesting, though, because what you're saying is absolutely in favor of individualism,
yet for any kind of a fundamental change, you require tribes to take over other tribes,
you know, not necessarily violently, but, you know, it's only a better idea that will
defeat an idea.
It's a more capable tool that will defeat a tool and it's only a more capable God that
will defeat a God.
And so where are we with respect to, for lack of a better word, making Prometheism into
a tribal kind of a gathering, tribal kind of a force, organized kind of a force?
Let me just say something on a deeper level about that.
Plato is a very complex thinker.
Plato is an esoteric writer.
There are all kinds of dimensions to Plato's thought.
And I think that the Platonists really are doing a disservice to Plato.
They misunderstood him fundamentally when they created this almost ideological system
based on his thought.
But Plato got something very right in Republic when he wrote that people need religion.
People need some kind of a spiritual ideology to serve as the backbone of a viable constitutional
order.
And this is one of the things that, you know, Prometheus blessed them, the founding fathers
of the United States did not really understand.
They projected their own free spiritedness onto the majority of society.
They misunderstood the mass of the American citizenry as potential Thomas Jefferson's
and, you know, potential Tom Payne's, right, failing to recognize that the ethos that they
had and the capacities that, you know, that were their own represent a tremendous deviation
from the norm.
I mean, these people were a spiritual elite who, you know, could have been a beacon of
enlightenment and liberation for the entire planet and in fact, you know, in some ways
were for a long time.
But they overestimated the capacity of the average person to find his own way and, you
know, define his own life under a constitutional order with something like, let's say, freedom
of religion, where, you know, the state has no defined religious orientation.
And you know, there was a letter actually that Jefferson wrote to Madison, I think,
after he was president, after he was in office.
And he basically wrote to Madison that in a couple of generations, there won't be any
Christianity left in this country, that, you know, with the system that we provided, this
kind of libertarian constitution and freedom of religion, we will, in effect, allow the
free space for an educational system to arise that gives people the tools to liberate themselves
and to elevate their own understanding.
And then he adds after he writes this passage to Madison, and if it turns out that I'm wrong
and that these Christians are still here in two or three generations, the experiment of
the United States will have proven a failure.
It will be reputation by experiment.
This is an experiment, he said to Madison, and it will have been shown that we were wrong
about human nature.
So again, going back to Plato and Republic, in response to what you were saying, people
need some higher orienting spiritual values or some deeply rooted basis for a constitutional
order.
A constitution isn't worth the paper it's written on if it's, you know, a set of soulless
laws that, you know, are not somehow a reflection of the ethical fiber of the people themselves.
And so, yes, I think Prometheism is or something, you know, like it is needed if we're going
to successfully navigate this crisis.
And in terms of, you know, the specific question of where we are at with that, I think that
it's an idea.
And the objective is to sell this idea to people with the resources to ensure that the
collapse of the United States, which cannot be stopped at this point, that the collapse
of the United States takes place in a fashion that yields a political order from out of
the Western states, hopefully, out of the libertarian part of this country, yields a
political order that can serve as at least a bastion of resistance and a staging ground
for a liberation struggle on this planet.
You mentioned Prometheism or something like it.
A lot of people ask about your thoughts on Dogen.
I don't want to talk about Dogen because he's not here to respond, but I'm curious to know
what would you consider as some other things like Prometheism?
What would you consider as alternatives to what exists right now that can be viable in
the tomorrow of this piece of land?
So my problem with Dogen's thought, and I briefly corresponded with him at one point,
my problem with Dogen's thought is that basically it's traditionalism.
You know, first of all, he doesn't really have an ontology or an epistemology.
Dogen is an interpreter of Heidegger, and he interprets Heidegger in a very conservative
way along the lines of this idea that our heritage determines our destiny and that we
need to appropriate what's been vouchsafed to us by our ancestors and our political order
has to be based on the native tradition of our people and that we can replace the current
system with a multipolar world order organized around a number of different centers of gravity,
each one representing an organically unified civilization structured around a certain pith,
what he calls narod, an ethnos, that's the pith of a wider civilizational sphere.
In some ways it's not all that different from Samuel Huntington's idea of the class of civilizations.
And so it's like a Heideggerian version of Huntington's theory.
So you know, Dogen doesn't have, well, no, I shouldn't say he doesn't have a conception
of progress and the technological revolutionizing of human development, he does have a conception
of that.
He conceives of it as satanic.
I mean, you know, he's also a representative of Russian orthodoxy and coming from out of
a Russian orthodox worldview, he sees the forces that I would describe as Promethean
as, you know, offering humanity an empowering evolution beyond the limits of what currently
define the human condition.
He sees all of that as basically a temptation from Satan and that, you know, the Promethean
is effectively satanic and that modern technology is a demonic force that needs to be contained
and that, you know, effectively we should go back to some kind of a, you know, agrarian
traditional society.
So I don't really see that as a solution.
I, you know, I see that as an ideology that will be co-opted and used by the elites to
de-industrialize large parts of the planet so that they can maintain a monopoly on singularity
level technologies.
Dogen is playing right into the hands of those people.
And in fact, I don't want to go too far into conspiratorial territory, but I'll just put
this out here that I know that there are some people very well-placed, let's say in the
British intelligence apparatus that are using Dogen for exactly that purpose and he doesn't
realize it, but his work is being promoted by people who certainly don't agree with him,
but they find his ideology a convenient way to have a model ready for a de-industrialized
neo-agrarian society where, you know, ignorance of the masses is enforced through traditionalism.
Yeah, that was the part that was kind of a head scratcher for me when people were like
what you were talking about in our first conversation.
It was completely aligned with Dogen.
I was like, my understanding of Dogen is that technology has no place in his philosophy
whatsoever.
It has a place.
I'll go.
It has a place.
It's considered demonic.
Right.
Right.
But not in the sense that it is part of human experience.
I can't even divide human evolution and technological evolution from each other.
What you described actually sounds very much like what Steve Bannon is doubling down now
these days, that transhumanism has become an inseparable part of the dialogue and my
understanding is that he knows that this is a losing war and he wants to make it into
human versus, or as he's saying it, homo sapien versus post homo sapien.
Now he doesn't phrase it that way versus that, but this is my understanding that they're
pushing this.
Anything that goes beyond the limits of biological humanity is basically, as you said, it's satanic,
it's evil, it's dark, and we basically have to go beyond that.
Well, isn't that convenient for the intelligences behind UFOs, right?
We are surrounded by some advanced technological civilization that's fielding these exotic
aircraft, and clearly it's a post-singularity civilization.
Whatever technologies that we're looking at, their convergence into the technological singularity
a generation from now, have already yielded a post-singularity civilization for the people
who are piloting UFOs.
The same entities that are regularly violating our most sensitive airspace already have the
level of technology and scientific knowledge that people like Bannon and Dugin want to
deny to humanity.
My position is that we should achieve technological parity with these entities or come as close
to it as possible and use that technology in a way that empowers the human individual
and gives us some fighting chance against their machinations to basically turn us into
a feudal serf population.
Do you see anyone else talking about the same thing because the only other person I can
think about except you that brings technology into the core of the issue, and he's not
arguing for the sake of governance, he's a philosopher, Yuval Noah Harari.
He sees the evolution very related with technology and humanity, and he goes beyond humanity
and all that, but I see you as a unique, very, very unique example that is a treasure to
some and a mortal enemy to some others as you just described because you hit right at
the target and it's so organic to human existence that it's very, very difficult to deny the
viability of it, and you really have to take refuge to some other kind of an ideology as
you described that technology is evil inherently.
Yes, unfortunately what you're saying is true.
The problem with people like Yuval Harari is that they're still trying to accommodate themselves
to the establishment to some extent and not engage with the data, say, of parapsychology
or get into ufology and whatever because they think that it will discredit them with respect
to the establishment, and at the very least one can say that's a miscalculation because
I guarantee you the establishment view on things like ESP or UFOs is going to change
dramatically within the next 15 to 20 years, and if we want to really develop an alternative
to this global tyrannical system that's being put into place right now, we have to engage
with the full range of data and with everything that's been marginalized by the establishment
to date because the system that they want to put in place, the kind of technocratic
global totalitarian state that they're engineering, it completely incorporates knowledge of parapsychology,
and so to come up with a model that's a viable alternative to that, we need to do the same,
and you can't worry about being marginalized on account of it.
You have to think ahead.
You have to think at least a few decades ahead, which is what I'm doing, so yeah, unfortunately
you're right.
I mean, there aren't too many people doing that, and I wish there were, and so when I
said Prometheism or something like it, I mean like, look, if you have a problem with what
I'm doing, show me a better way.
I'll sign on.
Show me a more viable alternative.
If I see something better than what I've come up with, I'll go contribute to that project.
Yeah.
Let's go back to your book, Closer Encounters.
You mentioned that you published a book as an alternative to the description of what's
happening that's coming from the US government.
What is your description?
What is your perspective about what is happening?
What are these machines?
What are these entities behind these machines?
So first of all, I engage with the full range of data, meaning that the book talks about
abductions.
I mean, the UAP report said nothing about close encounters, even of the second kind,
let alone close encounters of the third and the fourth kind.
The report was focused on what are called close encounters of the first kind, which
are UFO sightings or the tracking of UFO by radar or something.
Close encounters of the second kind are when a UFO lands and leaves traces, like landing
gear marks or radioactive traces in the places where it landed, things like that.
Close encounters of the third kind are when beings or entities are seen in association
with UFOs, and then the fourth kind are abductions.
So I deal with the full range of close encounters in this book, and that's one huge point of
divergence from the UAP report.
And I think that eventually we will hear from the government about abductions and implants
and mutilations and the other subjects that I discussed, but we'll hear about it at a
time and in a way that suits their purposes in terms of rolling out this global totalitarian
system.
And so one of the things that I argue in this book is that we're probably eventually going
to be given a narrative that they're the good guys and they're the bad guys.
And you've got these nefarious gray aliens here who are abducting your children in the
middle of the night and they're implanting you and they're responsible for cattle mutilations.
But then there are these beautiful, blonde, tall white ancestors who created us in distant
antiquity and we are their offspring and they're our great ancestors, to put it in the language
of Chinese Confucianism.
And they are going to protect us from this diabolical enemy that's coming here and abducting
people in the middle of the night.
And the whole thing is a good cop, bad cop routine.
It's a hydra.
It's one entity with two or more heads and it's being used to create a false alternative
in order to get us to submit to a control system that already, I argue, has shaped the
religious beliefs of the majority of humanity.
One of the lines of argument in Closer Encounters is that the quote unquote revealed religions
are actually psychosocial control mechanisms put in place by the beings behind this phenomenon.
And so I argue in this book that instead of falling prey to this good cop, bad cop routine,
we ought to take a closer look at who exactly these beings are and what exactly the nature
of the control system that we're ensconced in is.
And my thesis is that what we're really dealing with here are not aliens coming from zeta
reticuli or being caught in a war between two different alien races.
What we're dealing with here is the deleterious effects of a group of human time travelers
on the continuum of our history, that time travel was achieved at a certain point in
human history, and that the people who achieved time travel technology, the people who harnessed
zero point energy and constructed anti-gravity propulsion systems and vehicles that also
are time machines, those people effectively set themselves up as gods over the rest of
us by being able to deal with the variables of human history on a fifth dimensional level.
In other words, to tinker with our 4D history from a higher dimensional vantage point.
And that that's really the nature of the problem.
And that's why we shouldn't expect any disclosure from any of our governments, any of the governments
of the leading world powers, because this is not a question of the defense of humanity
from some alien entity.
It's a question of being inside of an invisible control system set up by humanity to oppress
humanity.
Would you say that they're going traveling back in time to change something in the future
or they're just doing it to look?
What is the purpose?
If they've already achieved the God status and God capability?
Yeah.
What's the purpose of any political system for the people who lead it?
Right?
Once you are operating on a fifth dimensional level and you have, you know, zero point energy
that allows you to traverse space time and set up societies that you control in different
epochs, well, you know, why would you operate with any logic other than the logic of colonialism
and mass oppression that's determined most of human history?
Right?
I mean, what we're dealing with are people with the same colonial mentality that the
British Empire had, except they have time travel technology.
And you know, they see the majority of the human population as an animal farm, as a herd
that they want to maintain control over.
And they have all these beautiful justifications for it, which I get into in my book, like,
for example, that there's a cosmic order and they are higher evolved beings who are creating
a microcosm of the cosmic order, which allows people with a low level of consciousness to
cultivate themselves lifetime after lifetime through duty and service in their respective
caste so that they can ultimately, you know, make their way up to the rung of the system
that these putative gods see themselves as belonging on.
Cosmic experts.
Yeah, exactly.
Cosmic experts, you know, the Brahmins of the old Hindu caste system.
Right.
And so, you know, and look, the British colonialists thought this way, too, about the Indian population
and various Africans that they govern.
So, you know, with reference to Charles Forth, among other people, I argue that effectively
we're colonized, we're in a colonial system, and we're also in a system that resembles
a farm where we're being tagged like animals and monitored and, again, they'll provide
all kinds of sophisticated justifications for this, but really it's because they're
sadists and they're drunk on their own power, like, you know, the governors of any colonial
system.
Yeah.
Not bad.
And there are people in our timeline right now that you would say are in contact with
them and are aware of this dynamic?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, absolutely.
I think that even the people involved in the UAP preliminary assessment at the highest
level know exactly what's going on.
When the Office of Naval Intelligence is audited by the Senate to hand over its entire dossier
of close encounter reports, going back to the 1940s, and they come back and they talk
about the Omaha and this one and that one from 2000 and, you know, the Nimitz and the
Omaha from, like, 2004, 2007, that's all they have to give, well, listen, an executive
decision was made at some level by somebody who knows what's going on, who's got all
the data in front of them, who basically said, yeah, well, you know, to Congress, you know,
we'll hand over what we want to hand over that allows us to spin this in a way that
protects the plan, that protects the overall plan.
And so, yes, I think that there are liaisons, you know, at a high level in the Navy and
other branches of the military, there are liaisons who are meeting with members of this
what I call the Nordic breakaway civilization, a time traveling breakaway civilization that's
operating on a hyperdimensional level.
Are these the same as lizard people?
I get into that briefly in this book.
I'm not convinced that these quote unquote reptilians are actually aliens.
If you consider our own genetic engineering capabilities right now, let alone what they'll
be, you know, on the other side of the technological singularity in a generation, even now in the
top laboratories in the world, we could take dinosaur DNA, which we have, I mean, this
is the Jurassic Park scenario, right?
We could take dinosaur DNA and splice it with human DNA, particularly if you take the DNA
of something like a Deinonychus, which was a like five foot tall bipedal dinosaur with
opposable thumbs and binocular vision, and you splice it with human DNA, you can create
a reptilian humanoid.
And you know, I think it's possible that entities like that, like the so-called reptilians,
are really products of a kind of Frankenstein's laboratory, not necessarily, you know, aliens
coming here from somewhere else.
Have you heard of stoned ape theory?
Yes.
Terence McKenna, so that's very interesting, because the argument is that our brain evolved
much faster than the rest of our body.
And some people are saying that actually the modern humans are the result of being genetically
modified by extraterrestrial or maybe, as you were saying, humans who are time traveling
from the future.
But stoned ape theory is interesting to me because I've had numerous amount of psychedelic
experiences.
And on some of the substances like DMT, you encounter some of these beings that it's really
pointless to even talk about it because it's beyond words what is happening, but it seems
more real than this dimension or this reality, however you want to define it.
Do you see any kind of an alignment between these interests and some of the substances
that are available on this planet, like psychedelic substances?
And perhaps that could be the reason that we have evolved the way we have evolved for
the past tens of thousands of years.
Well, it's a complex question, but yes, I do.
In my book, In Closer Encounters, and this is a line of argument that I already began
to unfold in Prometheism, I argue that we're living in a quantum computational system,
that the cosmos is like a gigantic quantum computer.
Simulation?
The problem with the word simulation is that it implies that there's a reality and that
this is a simulacrum of that reality, whereas what I actually think is going on is that
it's just the nature of the cosmos to be a computational system.
And there are many nested programs inside this system.
So you could say it's like a simulation within a simulation within a simulation, but there's
no original that this is a simulacrum of.
Information processing is just the nature of the computational cosmos.
And substances like DMT, I think, are hacks to get to a higher reference level inside
the information processing system, that there's a wider cyberspace beyond the parameters of
the reality that we're inside of, beyond the limits of the program that we are functioning
in the context of right now.
And the substances like DMT or other psychedelics basically allow you an access portal to another
level of cyberspace, and that these beings like reptilians and mantids and so forth that
are seen in that level on that dimension, if you want to put it in that language, are
beings that know how to use this technology, namely the technology of psychedelics, in
order to navigate the cyberspace more effectively than we can.
And so I suspect that part of the metaphor of the forbidden fruit in Eden, which we find
in the book of Genesis, is that at least some part of that was exposure to psychedelics,
that there was a kind of Promethean rebel faction within the breakaway civilization,
the Titans as it were, who split with the gods and became advocates of humanity, Titans
like Prometheus, or in an Iranian context, Ahura Mazda, or Mithra or something.
I was actually going to ask you if Ahura Mazda is the same as Prometheus.
Short answer, yes.
And so I think that part of the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge was psychedelics
and its transformative potential for human consciousness.
Yeah, John Allegro, he has an entire thesis that Jesus himself was a mushroom, that people
basically took and had these experiences, a manna from heaven and all those things.
I wish that Jesus were a mushroom.
If you want to know what I think about Jesus, read, read closer encounters, but yeah, if
only Jesus were a mushroom, that would be great.
Yeah, I mean, we don't, can we even know who Jesus really was?
Because the idea that is being presented, I don't buy it at all whatsoever because there
is a group of people who believe that Jesus actually didn't die and he went back to Kashmir
and there is a tomb and shrine for Jesus right there, which to me, it is more evidence than
what they're saying that, oh, he went up and will come back with Imam Zaman kind of idea.
To make a very long story short, the guy who died in Kashmir was Apollonius of Tiana.
He was born at the same time as Jesus.
He taught in Judea using the Aramaic language.
He was from Syria and he was a Pythagorean Mithraic initiate who basically preached his
philosophical religion in the vernacular of every culture that he encountered.
He attempted to translate his esoteric teaching in a language that a local culture would understand.
He also was conversant in Aramaic, which was a kind of lingua franca of that region, and
he taught in Judea.
When you read The Life of Apollonius of Tiana by Philostratus, who was a noted Roman author,
we have almost no objective trace of this Jesus character in the literary high culture
of the Roman Empire, in Roman histories, chronicles, anything, we can't find this Jesus character.
But one of the most notable Roman authors wrote a biography of Apollonius of Tiana,
and there were statues of this guy in many Roman cities.
According to this biography, the guy performed exactly the same miracles as Jesus when he
was in Judea, exactly the same miracles, bringing Lazarus back from the dead, healing people
who were maimed in various ways, had various ailments.
Point for point, the Roman authorities attempt to crucify Apollonius of Tiana.
He escapes crucifixion and travels through greater Iran into northern India, where he
lives to a ripe old age and dies there.
And interestingly, the name Jesus in Hebrew, Yeshua, just means savior.
So it's a title, it's not a name, right?
So Apollonius could easily have been called Yeshua when he was preaching to Essenes and
other people in Judea.
So I think the guy who died in Kashmir was Apollonius of Tiana.
But then there's a whole other thing going on in terms of this Jesus Christ.
And that's where we get into the close encounter phenomenon.
There are many specific details in the Gospels that have to do with his baptism in the Jordan,
the so-called transfiguration event, the resurrection, the ascension.
There are classic descriptions of close encounter phenomena of the type that you find all over
the Old Testament, from the story of Moses and the Exodus to the tens of UFOs that Ezekiel
sees, the coordination of the siege of the city of Jericho between Joshua and the commander
of the Lord's army, who's one of these tall Nordics.
The features of the Gospel account of the life of Jesus that basically have all the
characteristics of a close encounter phenomena suggest that something else was also going
on at that time and place besides the itinerant preaching of Apollonius of Tiana.
Some kind of psyop was run in order to create this character, this image, this icon, Jesus
Christ, son of Abraham, son of David, a Moshiach of the Jews, who would ultimately also become
the second of the three great messengers of Islam.
And so this is what I find profoundly troubling and which I discuss at length in my book.
Probably there was Apollonius of Tiana as a genuine spiritual teacher as the basis for
some elements of the biography of Jesus.
But then there was overlaid onto that some kind of a psyop and social engineering project
which reshaped the raw material of Apollonius's mission in Judea into this monstrosity that
is the institution of the Catholic Church or the Orthodox Church into this machinery
that carried out the Holy Inquisition and other atrocities against the human individual
throughout the course of centuries.
To corrupt it, basically.
Yeah, I mean look, if Apollonius was the basis for some of the more positive and enlightening
aspects of the teachings of Jesus, it has been corrupted beyond any recognition and
no attempt should be made to salvage it whatsoever.
If Apollonius of Tiana could see what was done in order to produce Jesus Christ from
out of whatever he was up to in Judea, I think that he himself would side with the antichrist,
would basically become an advocate for Lucifer.
So what is stopping a branch of Christians to pursue technological route and bring Jesus
back in a form of hologram?
There are Christians who are leveraging technology.
There is a Mormon transhumanist organization.
I had their founder and president on the podcast, this is years ago.
And I also had a gentleman who is a reverend and a PhD who had argued, this is like five
six years ago, that we have to use artificial intelligence in order to evangelize Christianity
because we're basically being left behind.
Yeah, well you know, look, I mean I'm pausing because I'm so dismayed by these kinds of
things.
I mean I've seen them in my own life.
I've been involved with people who on the face of it seemed very intelligent, well read,
and so forth.
And then in the end they just use their intellect to defend these retarded, regressive religious
ideologies.
This is exactly what you're talking about, like the idea that you would use advanced
technology, singularity level technology, to manufacture the vindication of your prophetic
literature.
That you would sort of manufacture the second coming of Christ using advanced technology.
This is what I'm really concerned about, is that, you know, back in the Cold War there
was a plan, I think in the 1970s, when they first started developing holographic technology,
the CIA had this plan to go off the coast of Cuba and paint a hologram of the Virgin
Mary over the island of Cuba in order to incite a revolution against Fidel Castro.
And I can well imagine that, especially if we have that kind of biblical republic that
we were talking about earlier, arise from out of the American South, and some of these
people still have access to high-tech companies and various resources to use singularity technologies
that come online in the next couple decades, that a kind of second coming will be technologically
manufactured and used in order to cement this global totalitarian system, which is one of
the reasons why I am so vehemently opposed to the whole project of the revealed religions,
and why I've been emphatic that Prometheus is Lucifer, that Lucifer is the Latin name
of Prometheus, and that the reason I'm choosing Prometheus is because it's a symbol that doesn't
depend on Christianity.
The image of Satan or of Lucifer is sort of a reaction against Judeo-Christianity and
it was formed within a Judeo-Christian context.
So in a way it's parasitic upon the Abrahamic revelation, whereas Prometheus is like the
Satan before Satan, the original Satan, right?
And so at the same time though, I'm perfectly, not only willing, but I'm perfectly clear
in acknowledging that from a Judeo-Christian or an Islamic perspective, Prometheus is Satan
or Lucifer.
And a lot of people come to me and they say like, this is, what are you doing?
This is a disastrous strategy, you're alienating the majority of people, blah, blah, whatever.
We're in serious danger.
These people are thinking about manufacturing the second coming of Christ.
They are.
They are.
They're thinking about manufacturing the second coming of Christ.
Because I just said it hypothetically, that what is stopping a group of people to do that?
They're planning to do this and we need a very hardcore resistance movement that is
unequivocally opposed to this Christian and Islamic bullshit.
There can't be any compromise.
You need a backbone that can stand up against the second coming, a technologically engineered
apocalypse.
How far away are we, do you think, from that point?
30 to 50 years.
Wow.
That's crazy.
It's unbelievable how fast it's happening and it's also unbelievable how blind people
are to realize that it is happening faster and faster because technology is advancing
exponentially.
Our experience is linear, but our experience absolutely depend and is defined on a basis
of technological advancement and progress, which is exponential.
That's basically the whole purpose of humanity merging with technology at some point in order
to create whatever it is going beyond this biological limits that can be biological but
also ideological with respect to Christianity and Islam and all these things that we talked
about.
That's right.
Look, when you graph the approach to the technological singularity, there's this steep curve that
takes place from the 20th century into the 21st century where progress is being made
at such an exponential rate that over the course of every decade, there's more technological
development than has taken place over preceding centuries until finally you get to the point
where the steep curve becomes a spike.
That spike is the singularity.
What these people want is to deindustrialize large parts of the planet on the Dugan model,
the traditionalist neo-agrarian Dugan model, deindustrialize large parts of the planet,
retain a monopoly on these emerging singularity level technologies, secret them away from
the majority of the population, and then use these technologies in order to manufacture
the apocalypse and project the second coming that is used to cement their millennium of
totalitarian tyranny over the planet.
Wow.
Crazy times.
Where do you see the role of Iran in this world?
For me, Iran could be the fulcrum of the whole damn thing.
Why?
Because first of all, no country is more Promethean in its foundation than Iran.
This goes back to what you were asking earlier about Ahura Mazda and Prometheanism, right?
The Hakhaw Manasheed state ideology, the state ideology of the first empire known to human
history, a cosmopolitan world order that encompassed almost the entire known world, where half
of the population of earth at that time were citizens of the Persian Empire.
The state ideology of that regime was Promethean.
That's what that was.
If you look at what Darius the Great was doing with the development of the banking system,
with the standardizing of coinage, with the royal road system, this intercontinental highway
that he was building, with his geoengineering projects, the canals, the bridges, et cetera,
this guy was a titanic Promethean builder.
This ideal of Ahura Mazda and Sephant Aminu, the progressive mentality, the forward-oriented
mentality, and the fire of the forge that Iran was oriented around spiritually at that
time, that is the beginning, at least in recorded history, of the Promethean trajectory of development
that's taken up in the European enlightenment by people like the Marquis de Condorcet and
Hegel and so forth.
And so good.
Correct me if I'm wrong, because I think my understanding is that Mithraism pretty much
took over the world until Christianity merged with the Roman state in order to create political
Christianity to stop the growth and spread of Mithraism.
Is that correct?
Call me a conspiracy theorist, but it was done by design.
We were this close to taking the Roman Empire.
Iran and Rome would have merged, they would have become one entity stretching from Spain
to the border of China under Mithraism.
It would have been as Hacham and Ashit Empire 2.0, much more expansive.
And instead of having this retarded ideology of Christianity be the spiritual backbone
of the colonization of the Americas, the Americas would have been colonized from out of the
old world by Mithras who are interested in liberation and progress, which literally would
have been the return of Quetzalcoatl to the Mayan territories.
These poor Mayans who had their own Promethean figure in distant antiquity, namely Quetzalcoatl,
who fought a battle against Tezcatlpoca, their Zeus, the god of the smoking mirror.
Tezcatlpoca is the guy who taught them how to cut human hearts out on tops of pyramids
and sacrifice people and all that.
Quetzalcoatl is their Prometheus figure, and he was actually described as being a tall
Nordic looking person together with his companions.
So these poor Mayans were told by Quetzalcoatl that they would come back one day and save
them from this tyrannical, archontic bastard Tezcatlpoca.
And so when the Spaniards showed up, these Mayan priests misinterpreted them as the return
of Quetzalcoatl, and instead these inquisitorial Christians plundered the Mayan world and burned
all their codices and so on and so forth.
Now if Mithraism had conquered the Roman Empire and the expansion further to the west from
Spain into the Americas had taken place under the banner of Mithraism, of a Mithraic Rome
that had fused with Iran, imagine how different the contact with the Mayans would have been.
And that future was stolen from us.
This is what I mean when I say the variables of our 4D history have been messed with on
a fifth dimensional level.
It's things like this, the creation of Christianity to change the timeline so that we wind up
with this horrendous Catholic plundering of South America instead of a Mithraic enlightenment
in South America, Mithraic reclamation of Mayan culture and so forth that we could have
had.
Yeah, interesting, you mentioned the Mayans.
I've done a lot of DMT and many times, there are two different kinds, right?
There's a natural one that comes, which by itself it must be an alien kind of an interference
because there's one specie out of 7,000 plus amphibian specie, this toad, bufo, that generates
the poison on its back and on its gland that you milk it basically and dry it and you smoke
it and that's the natural DMT and it's only this toad that generate that kind of a substance.
The other one is NNDMT, which is concentrated chemically created.
You need to take three hits, visuals are way more profound than the bufo one.
And I have come across the imagery of massive pyramid with Mayan symbology on them, massive
blue and gold usually, pyramids with Mayan symbology around them coming across variety
of these entities.
I have never seen a cross or image of someone who like, I'm Jesus, I'm Christ and I'm not
like, I don't have any kind of a bias against it.
I think the humanity's mission from the beginning has been to identify this kind of a central
point of alliance, central point of alignment that you said Mithraism, Prometheism and that
has been stolen, this definition of the divine that we all basically can see ourself as a
reflection of it.
And so I just wanted to share that experience.
I don't know if you had experiences with these kind of things, DMT especially, but I think
that we got to get to some really interesting places.
There is a place right now, DMTX, I think they're calling it, that they've developed
this machine that will keep you going in that realm for hours instead of like the 20 or
40 minutes and they want to map that realm.
They believe that this is not a projection of mind.
As you said, this is like a hacking or I think of it as the retuning of a receiver in order
to be able to interact with this kind of, with these dimensioned wards, layers, whatever
you want to call it.
I completely support that type of work.
I think one important point to make in response to what you said is that first of all, I'm
very glad that you didn't see Jesus.
I probably wouldn't make more money if I'd seen Jesus.
Probably.
And, you know, I've never said this on air before, but I've seen Jesus.
And in retrospect, frankly, I wasn't that impressed.
And you know, I think that at this point really has to be made that we are dealing with people
who have what I call a psychotronic technology and they have a kind of technology that's
on the other side of the spectral revolution.
They have a technology that fully incorporates scientifically rigorous knowledge of ESP,
psychokinesis and so forth.
And so it's not difficult for these beings to project images into your mind.
You know, it's razzle dazzle is what it is.
And you should always consult your own conscience and examine your own ethos, not be awed by
whatever psychic projections these beings want to use in order to capture you, basically.
And so, yeah, if you do see Jesus, please ask him what he thinks about the Holy Inquisition
or about what was done to the Mayans, please ask him about Hypatia of Alexandria, who was
skinned alive and burned at the stake under the orders of, you know, Bishop Kirill, who
was subsequently turned into a saint and canonized by the church.
I think maybe these are some good questions to run by him in case you see Jesus.
You're a witch burning.
And by the way, have you ever heard of Apollonius of Tiana?
Now it's interesting that you saw Jesus, was it on like, feel free not to answer, but I'm
interested to see whether or not you were under influence of any kind of a substance
or like meditation or something like that.
The disturbing answer is no, I wasn't under the influence of any of those things, which
makes it all the more impressive, disturbing and impressive.
And I have to tell you that these things are these these things can't help but to be impressive
in the moment in which you're in that experience.
And this is actually one of my problems with a lot of these people who are acid heads and
users of psychedelic substances, psychedelics, again, as I said, there are potentially very
empowering technology, but not at the expense of your, you know, reasoning capacity and
your examination of your own conscience and also your sense of social and political responsibility.
Right.
So you need to be able to contextualize any psychedelic or mind-expanding experience,
even if it comes, let's say from meditation, you need to be able to contextualize it with
all those other factors considered.
So this is, for example, one of my problems actually, even with Gotama, is that when you
look carefully at the things that Gotama was preaching, you know, Sakamuni, Buddha, Sakamuni
had an experience of extremely refined, subtle states of consciousness that are, you know,
even beyond what most people on psychedelics are capable of experiencing.
But and and this is another very important point, Sakamuni explained to people that you
could come away from these types of experiences with the delusion that there's a God because
you lose your sense of your ego and you kind of feel like everything is sort of all one.
Right.
Yep.
But he was also an ultra rational person, Gotama Buddha was, and he could explain how this
is an experience of the interdependent origination of all things, and it doesn't mean that there's
one God.
That's a conceptualization of the experience in retrospect.
You are objectifying that experience when you frame it as, oh, it's all one.
It's Brahman.
Absolutely.
The Anatman teaching of Gotama Buddha is that it's not just no self in terms of your own
personal ego, it's that there can be no entity with an inherent identity such as is imagined
when people use the concept God.
So that's an abstraction from out of that kind of psychedelic experience.
But that having been said, one of my problems with Sakamuni Buddha is that he lost a sense
of sociopolitical responsibility by having these experiences.
His pacifism and rejection of the potential for social and political transformation is
an abdication of responsibility.
The man went AWOL, and that's my problem with him.
And I think I make this argument at length in Iranian Leviathan.
I think this is why Darius the Great exiled him to northern India.
I don't think that the biographies we have of Gotama are correct.
I think this was a man involved at a very high level in administration in the Persian
Empire.
He was a Scythian, and he was sent to be a sage in northern India after his death was
faked by Darius, because Darius understood that putting this man in a position of sociopolitical
responsibility would be disastrous to society.
Would you say the sociopolitical responsibility is inherent within the human experience?
Yeah, I agree with Aristotle on that.
I disagree with Aristotle about almost everything, but I agree with Aristotle on that, that as
Aristotle put it, man is a political animal, that one of the mistakes that these people
who, you know, well, people who use a lot of psychedelics, who've had a lot of mind
expanding experiences, they lose sight of the fact that if we're not vigilant about
developing a constructive and empowering political system, our apathy is going to be used against
us by people who will establish one or another form of tyranny, and will probably ban psychedelics
as part of that tyrannical system, right?
And I mean, look, just take the example of the Buddhists in the cradle of Buddhism, northern
India and, you know, eastern Iran.
Buddhism was wiped out in its cradle by Islam.
I mean, the demolition of the Bamiyan Buddhas was the last act by the Taliban, but that's
sort of like a, what do you want to call it, like, you know, epitaph of the centuries of
genocidal warfare of Islam against pacifistic Buddhism.
And it shows you the problem with, you know, misinterpreting the states of consciousness
accessible through psychedelics as, you know, as, as, you know, some kind of a, some kind
of an experience that shows you that politics is unimportant or that, you know, somehow
like, you know, it's all about expanding our consciousness and having more experiences
and all this.
No, no, no, no, no.
The tyrants are just waiting to put you inside a psychical control system where you're not
even going to, children won't grow up in a society where they have access to such experiences.
So you know, this is why I value Plato having taken politics as seriously as he did by comparison
to someone like Gotama Buddha.
I think they had very similar, similar levels of understanding in terms of ontology and
epistemology, but you know, to me, Plato is the deeper and more serious thinker because
he never lost sight of his socio-political responsibility.
Yeah, it seems to me that it's more about recognition of human nature that, you know,
without, without war, peace has no meaning and definition whatsoever.
It's just both sides.
I didn't want to use that term to both sides of the same coin because there is no coin.
It is what it is.
And what you said about people who, asset heads, as you mentioned, I totally agree with
that.
I don't hang out with anybody who is engaged in this under a lot of those people around,
mainly because what you said about people who want to use technology to prove the gospel
of Christ, for example, because they've already made a decision about what is enlightenment
is, what is God is, what God is and all those things, and they're using these kind of substances
basically to confirm a bias.
So this is not looking for the truth or anything like that.
And I believe that it will get you to a point from which you have to go by yourself without
any kind of a tool, including psychedelics.
You're absolutely spot on.
A lot of people will become deluded and a lot of people use it as, you know, a justification
for just doing nothing.
Another thing is also, and I think this also affects you, that a lot of people like Buddha,
for example, a lot of enlightened people, a lot of mystics, they write books and texts,
which is the result of a journey that they've been on since they were born, all the experiences
that they had.
Reading those books don't make you enlightened.
Reading those books don't make you knowledgeable.
So this is, I'm sure, something that you also face with, that a lot of people maybe take
different kind of outtakes.
They have misconceptions about what you're saying, because what you've developed is based
on a one, two, three, four, five, until ten, which is your book.
And people are at one, they're looking at ten, they're like, oh, I got it.
But they have their own biases, their own limitations and everything.
Sure.
I mean, that's true.
But look, it's par for the course, especially if you want to get involved in sociopolitics
and activism, you will be badly misinterpreted and misunderstood.
You know, I mean, Nietzsche knew this about his own work.
He, Nietzsche, you know, had a very small following when he was alive.
I think he sold 300 copies of all of the books he ever wrote during his own lifetime.
That's it.
And he, but he wrote that someday he would be famous and he was kind of sickened by that
prospect because he also believed that he would be badly misinterpreted, just absolutely
perverted, grotesquely perverted by his own sister.
He turned out to be that's right.
Perverted by his own sister in more ways than one, but we won't get into that.
But yeah, so look, it's par for the course.
And if you want to get your hands dirty with political responsibility, you have to be ready
to be misunderstood and to dumb things down and, you know, I mean,
But I think it's also important with respect to spectral revolution that you've been talking
about that I would ask you if you don't mind to describe it one more time for people who
didn't hear it the last time you were on the podcast.
Because it reminded me of what Gore Vidal said, that we don't even know what our cage
looks like because we've never seen it from the outside.
And so all these terms, all these definitions, good, bad, right, wrong, evil, good, they're
all being defined within this cage, within this frame that has been presented to us as
a very limited pixel of possible reality within which we can't be controlled, we can't be
held in line and all those things.
So spectral revolution, you know, plays on the word specter, which is a polyvalent word.
It has more than one meaning, the word specter.
And I employ all of the meanings of the word specter and this concept of a spectral revolution.
One sense of the word specter has to do with the spectrum, like the light spectrum, right,
or electromagnetic spectrum or whatever.
A spectrum is a phenomenon where various points that you might abstract from out of it are
not really distinct from one another, right?
So it's the idea that all of the categories or entities or qualities that we use to form
binary oppositions like light and darkness, matter and energy, spirit and the spirit and
the body or the soul and the body, and also ethical categories like good versus evil,
that these are all terms abstracted from out of a spectrum that's continuous and that there
aren't intrinsically sharp divisions between any of these.
Then there's the sense of specter as what is to come, right?
Specter is what is to come.
And this is the sense in which Marx uses the word at the outset of the Communist Manifesto
when he says there's a specter haunting Europe, the specter of communism.
And so it evokes the idea of process that our cosmos does not have a static and fixed
structure that we live in a world of becoming, that reality is processual.
And this process, ontological process, has everything to do with why binary oppositions
are our own abstractions and they're not intrinsic to reality, right?
Because when everything is in a state of flux, you also recognize that light becomes darkness
and good becomes evil and vice versa, and matter and spirit are two different phases
of the same phenomenon.
And so that second sense of the spectral as process, as becoming, as what is to come,
as the future, it is very deeply connected to the first sense of specter as spectrum
that defies all binary oppositions and deconstructs all apparent dichotomies.
Because the core is quantum, it's not binary.
Exactly.
It's a probability function.
It's a superposition.
It's a superposition.
And so then the third and final sense of the spectral is, of course, the most obvious one,
the ghost.
A specter is a ghost.
And what I'm putting my finger on is that parapsychological phenomena, the ghostly,
the paranormal, it is a key or a clue to the nature of reality as process and to the spectrum
from out of which we are abstracting all these binary oppositions and dichotomies.
And so the real potential of a scientific recognition of specters, of ghosts, of paranormal
phenomena is to be able to deconstruct the putative reality of all these dichotomies,
of all these abstract polarities and recognize that they're only terms that have a practical
significance that really have a utilitarian purpose.
And we should not idolize these objectifications that we've created ourselves.
And we should understand that reality is process and that the driving force of everything is
ultimately evolution.
It's a creative evolutionary force that we need to align ourselves with.
And that's the deepest philosophical significance of the spectral as the ghostly or the paranormal.
Not to look at it as, I don't know, a bunch of marvels or wonders to gawk at or whatever.
It's a fundamental transformation of our conception of the nature of reality that's really at
stake here and taking a philosophical approach to the data of parapsychology.
But then to get into the revolution aspect of spectral revolution, my suggestion throughout
all of my works, beginning in Prometheus and Atlas, is that this recognition of the spectral
on the deep philosophical level that I just summarized will require the total transformation
of all of our social and political institutions.
Because if you're going to admit that ESP is real or that psychokinesis is real, well,
then you're faced with a problem of people telepathically spying on other people, people
using psychokinesis in order to inflict harm on their neighbors.
And there's no way that you can manage that through the current legal or criminal justice
system, which is a punitive justice system.
Its crime is committed and then there's some kind of retroactive justice.
You can't have that.
We tried that when witches were accused in Salem and in other places of hexing people.
And judges back in the Puritan colonies ultimately had them burned at the stake.
If we wind up with the mainstream scientific establishment not only recognizing an ability
like psychokinesis, but developing training protocols for the cultivation of these abilities
that would be akin to learning a martial art so that you have large swaths of the population
cultivating their potential psychokinetic abilities, you also need a type of society
that's going to be able to discourage the misuse of these abilities.
Because there's really no way to handle that through the kind of punitive justice system
that we have now.
So what becomes more important than anything else is developing a society so deeply unified
by an ethos that is based on each individual's recognition of his neighbor's right to live
and to create and to have spiritual autonomy so that no particular member of this society
would harbor the kind of ill will within his subconscious that would end up in a misuse
of psychokinetic ability than after the fact has to be dealt with through a criminal justice
system.
You need to make it so that you have people so deeply unified on a psychical level that
they would not even think to harm their neighbor by misusing psychokinesis.
But of course then that presents you with the challenge of preserving the individual
and making sure that the individual is not subsumed into some kind of a hive mind or
collective consciousness.
Whether or not this is something that can be achieved through genetic engineering.
Very dangerous.
I mean because you do not want to in any way eliminate the genetic correlates of human
individuality from out of the genome or even compromise them.
And so I think more what's needed is the cultivation of a spiritual ethos and the development of
the core of a new society of spiritually resilient individuals who are free spirited enough to
want to see their fellow man flourish.
That's really what's needed.
And yeah it's a tall order and you know I'm afraid to say that you know given the time
constraints that we face there's just no way that you know you're going to be able to transform
the majority of humanity in that fashion.
So really it's a question of developing you know a model society, the nucleus of a new
society and then defending it like a you know citadel against any and every potential enemy.
Absolutely, absolutely.
I'm not optimistic but this is a noble thought and concept to thrive for.
Absolutely.
And that's where you have to begin.
People can look at me as a naive idealist, fine what are you doing?
I mean come up with a better plan.
It begins with an idea, it's an idea.
You know if the right people are convinced by that idea something can actually happen.
There are people with resources who understand the nature of the problem and if they haven't
done anything better right now well don't blame them.
They haven't been shown a better idea.
You have to present them with an alternative vision that's viable and you know that they
might prefer to the current modus operandi right, the de facto program.
And then perhaps if you could convince enough of those people it will go from being an idea
into a program.
Absolutely.
Well I never thought of you as a naive idealist or anything like that just to put it out there.
I see you as a incredibly as I said unique and a valuable asset to humanity.
And I have to say that I was completely disconnected with Iranian, everything coming from Iran
because I grew up there.
You know I lived there for 23 years, I went to school and I didn't want to have anything
to do with it.
It was until we spoke the first time that I went back and read and listened to some
of your material on Iran and Persian Empire and the philosophy behind it.
I actually feel good about being from that country.
So I think this is a disservice that your books are not being taught at Iranian schools
because it's not like well I guess it's against Islam but that's the order that everybody
will be very lucky if it's replaced by something like Prometheism.
Look I'll go I mean and I hate to end on this note but I have a lot of problems with the
government of the Islamic Republic okay but I actually I cannot blame the Islamic Republic
for the fact that my works are not circulating in Persian and Iran.
I was involved with a group of people in the Iranian opposition who had enough resources
to be able to ensure that all my writings were translated into Persian and we could
have had them widely disseminated in Iran but let's just put it this way after working
with them for a number of years I see why for 40 years the so-called opposition hasn't
been able to overthrow this regime.
They can't even get one thinker's writings competently translated and circulated in the
country let alone rival you know the power of the Revolutionary Guard and its military
industrial complex.
So I think that there's potential for transformation from within Iran itself over the longer term
and that Iran is very important in terms of the larger Islamic civilizational sphere and
ensuring that you know the Middle East and Central Asia are not subsumed by this global
totalitarian system that's being planned right now.
That you know at a key moment Iran could act as a kind of Promethean force of resistance
from within that whole civilizational sphere and internally transform itself while at the
same time maintaining its force projection capability and acting as a kind of bastion
of resistance from within the quote-unquote Islamic world and throwing a huge monkey wrench
in you know the plan to basically subjugate the planet.
I completely agree with you and this is an agreement that has been developed over the
past maybe a year or over the past couple of months that I went from Iran should not
have for example access to nuclear weapons to thinking to myself why wouldn't Iranian
government want to have a nuclear weapon and a couple of them considering the world order
and where they're placed at this point.
I totally agree with you.
You see like listen the people in Tehran watching this right now whatever you know people I'm
doing your work for you there are a lot of people by the way they think like somehow
I work for you know I'm somehow in cahoots with Iranian intelligence whatever the only
involvement with the Iranian intelligence I've had is that they cyber hacked me they
monitor all my stuff they've done it for years whatever but they should watch this right
now and see that you know anyway whatever I hope that nationalists within the IRGC really
take seriously the responsibility that they have to their own to their own heritage and
to the rest of the world and understand what kind of a transition needs to take place there
sooner rather than later.
Excellent, you gave a message to Iran and Iranians and I want you to finish again thank
you so much for this time it's such a pleasure having you on this podcast I hope that it
can happen maybe once every year or something like that until we hit the single.
It's always my pleasure anytime.
Yeah likewise.
Dr. Georgiani's book is Closer Encounters go and buy it and support this man all across
social media and everywhere.
You mentioned the message to Iran and Iranians let's end the program with a message to humanity
and the world.
Let me quote Nietzsche, man is a tightrope between ape and over man.
A tightrope is not somewhere you want to stay okay it is not a stable place there is no
human nature that defines the limits of what we can be in the way that various animals
have a species being that they can't do anything about as you put it earlier in our conversation
the quote unquote nature of man is inextricable from technology and technological development.
Technology made us we were technological before we were human the use of technology by primates
is what created the human being.
And so my message to humanity is that it's out it's time for us to outgrow ourselves
okay it is time to take an evolutionary leap.
We are at a bottleneck in our development right now where either we have to go backwards
into a neo feudal frankly retarded agrarian civilization where we have to face forcible
deindustrialization because certain elites consider us incapable of bearing the responsibility
of navigating the technological singularity or we have to be prepared to take this evolutionary
leap into a form of individuality and a type of society that is superhuman or post human
and everyone has to make a choice it's your choice you know which side of this battle
you want to stand on whether you want to align yourself with the force of evolution and progress
or whether you want to be a vehicle for the retardation of the planet and I put that choice
before every human being to basically transcend and outgrow mere humanity or to be reduced
to something like an ape right man is a tightrope between ape and overman you either have to
walk backwards or you have to walk forward this is not a place we can stay indefinitely
