Once you reduce the cost of access to space which has been the limiting factor so far you know everything can happen.
Hello and welcome to the 77th episode of Neohuman podcast. I'm a Gavahari etiologist on Twitter and Instagram and you can follow the show on liveinlimbo.com, iTunes, YouTube, BitChute and soon on Spotify and today with me I have Giulio Prisco. Welcome to Neohuman podcast Giulio.
Thank you very much and thank you for having me. Absolutely, it's a pleasure. Let's start with your background just so our audience have some kind of a context where your perspective is coming from. The work you've done, the lives you've lived and what are you mainly focused on now these days?
Let's make that as short as possible. I am a theoretical physicist by training. I worked in places like CERN, Geneva, the European Space Agency and similar places including the research and development organization of the European Council until 2005.
Then I became an entrepreneur. I ran a company focused on IT and virtual reality consulting for a few years. In the meantime I started to develop my own speculations on life, the universe and everything and I had been writing about that.
That's what I mostly do now. I write with some freelance writing now and then and that's it.
Was there some kind of a specific event that made you interested to think about philosophy and because you also, one of the main reasons that I really wanted to talk to you is you have a very unique perspective towards religion and technology.
I'm just interested to know if there was any specific kind of an event in your life that made you interested in whatever you want to call it, religious, spiritual, philosophical perspective instead of purely scientific and objective perspective.
A specific event? No, I don't really think so. In fact, if I remember what I was thinking when I was very young, but really very young, like six or seven, I thought exactly the same things that I think now.
Of course, not as far as the details are concerned, but the general imposition was already there. Coming to religion, it's interesting because my family was not really religious. We didn't go to church.
By and large, we consider religion as something that other people do. As a matter of fact, I always had some religious sensibilities, but I never really thought about that until the moment where I realized that science itself
is pointing very strongly towards the directions that have been already explored by religions. So one thing after another, I do call myself religious now. If I have to make the binary choice, religious or not religious, yes, religious is what I call myself.
Yeah, but you would have a different definition of religion than, let's say, Christians and Muslims and Jews and the big religions, big authoritarian organized religions, am I right?
Most people would say yes. My answer is no, I don't really think so. Every religion that I'm familiar with or every religion that I even vaguely know about has two different parts.
One is the path that I call cosmology, you know, answers to big questions about reality, survival after death, you know, the nature of the thing itself.
And the other is what I like to call geography or even zoning norms, you know, all the little prescriptions about what you have to eat, when you have to do things and with whom, you know, the prescriptive normative part of religions.
Now, I don't really care about the latter. I don't care about this geography and zoning norms at all.
But I think that here is where the differences between different religions can be found.
When it comes to the first part, the metaphysical, cosmological parts of religions, I tend to think that they are all saying pretty much the same thing in different words, of course, and in the language of the place and time where these religions originated.
But, you know, once you go past all that, I find that the basic message of different religions are very, very similar.
Interesting. We've been talking about the definition of God for the past couple of episodes. I had the last episode, I had James Lindsay, who has a PhD in mathematics, but he's also writing and talking about philosophy mostly.
And he's an atheist. He started with the new atheist movement to talk about his philosophical perspectives. But the definition of God that he disagrees with is the definition of God that I also disagree with, which is this authoritarian, very human-like kind of a figure that will judge you and send you to heaven or hell, punish or reward you.
But at the same time, I think this whole concept of God has been hijacked by people who wanted to control others based on some kind of a higher authority that there is no way you can argue with or have any kind of a conversation with.
But to me, God is very subjective in the sense that anybody can find their own interpretation of God, and it's everything and everywhere.
I would agree with that.
And how do you see this definition of God is becoming more and more at least a matter of debate, considering the technological evolution and technological revolution that we're going through in our societies today?
In fact, let's think about what the ultimate results of the technological development that we can see around us now could be.
It seems kind of evident that we live in a world that would appear magic to our grandfather because our technology enables us to do things that they could very hardly imagine.
And this trend can be expected to continue.
If this trend continues, then I think that in a few hundred years or a few thousand years, I'm not really very concerned about timelines.
But in the future, someday, we will be an interstellar civilization with knowledge, understanding of the universe and powers that we could only call godlike today.
The same thing has happened countless times in the history of the universe, and that when we will go to the stars, we will find there some civilization that we could only call gods.
In fact, you can see a hierarchy of intelligent life forms with greater capabilities.
And perhaps this hierarchy goes on forever until something which is infinitely far in the future in space and time and infinitely more powerful than anything that we can conceive of now.
And that something we could only call god. And that would be my definition of god, something like that, more or less.
Do you think that the concept of god is something that is knowable ultimately or it is something that is by design and by nature of it is unknowable?
I'm open to both possibilities. I'm open to the possibility of a natural god who should basically be an enhanced civilization with respect to us humans.
Much more powerful than us but ultimately understandable. And if there is just a limited number of facts that can be known about the universe, that is very likely the case.
Because if at some point science reaches its ultimate limits with the theory of everything and something like that, then once you have mastered that theory of everything, there is nothing more that you can know and there is nothing more that you can do.
In this case, I think whatever god there is, it is something that we can ultimately understand, not only understand but also become.
But now there is also another possibility. And this other possibility is that the breadth and depth of our knowledge of nature will never end.
And here I'm talking of a fractal theory of physics with theories within theories in an endless fractal zoom. Like an onion with an infinite number of layers, one inside the other.
Now if that is the case, the quest for more and more knowledge will never end.
And whatever definition of god you want to adopt, that god can only be found at the ultimate bottom of this onion with an infinite number of layers. That is not anything that we can imagine achieving.
Now I don't know which of these two possibilities is the case. I don't think everyone knows.
But in both cases we can conceive of a consistent concept of god. Was that clear?
Yeah, the concept of M-theory to me, it seems like itself can be seen as some kind of an objective human-made religion that there is some kind of an ultimate answer that we as humans can get to it.
But the we that you talk about becoming interstellar species, as I see it, is not going to be us humans in our biological forms.
It will be, at least the way that I understand it, as of right now, a hybrid between us biologically and our machines that are being developed now, whether you want to call it AGI, AI, whatever, AI is narrow, but AGI, super intelligence, whatever you want to call it.
So I just see that M-theory being the be-all end-all is very limited kind of a perspective that is being made based on our human understanding of everything, which is very, very narrow.
I think so. In fact, you know, the M-theory, which is a version of string theory, is something that has been created or discovered or invented by human mathematicians at the beginning of the 21st century.
Well, actually at the end of the 20s. We have hundreds of years ahead. We have thousands and millions of years ahead, I hope.
Do we really think that a theory that we can already describe can ever be the ultimate theory of science? It could be, but I personally don't think so.
I think the quest for better understanding will never end.
Now, coming to what our descendants who will live on the stars will be, I think, of course, they will not be identical to ourselves now. There will be hybrid human AI or perhaps AI augmented with human uploads.
Human uploads augmented with AI implants, post-biological life and all that. I think that's the inevitable evolution of things.
But why shouldn't we call them human anyway?
We are very different from our ancestors 2,000 years ago, who called themselves human, and we call human ourselves. And I think we are right, because we are the direct continuation and evolution of them.
And I see that happening in the future as well. The human species will leave the Earth, we will multiply across the galaxy and we will become other things.
But these other things will be a direct continuation of what we are now.
And therefore, if our name, if the name of our species is human now, that name will continue to be human in the future.
What you mentioned about string theory is also something that keeps coming up.
The way that string theory became a status quo in academia and physics department, that if you were researching or studying anything else other than string theory, they wouldn't give you grants, they wouldn't give you a budget.
All the budgets and grants and all the focus would have gone to string theory for many, many years.
And it begs the question, I'm wondering if you experienced a similar thing where you worked in the research and scientific capacities and places in Europe,
that the way that it was being treated or it has been treated, string theory, is that it shut down all other fields of research or any other kind of a narrative that would disagree with it for the sake of basically protecting the interest of people at the top of that echelon of academia.
Have you experienced something like that?
I haven't really experienced anything like that myself because I am a theoretical physicist by training.
I switched to applied physics very soon in my career.
So even if I have always stayed interested in theoretical physics, I have not really been working on that for 20 years after graduating from college.
So no, I haven't seen that.
Now there's one observation that I'd like to make, which is that perhaps you are making this a bit too extreme in the sense that yes, string theory is the dominating approach to new physics.
But it's not the only one. For example, when it comes to quantum gravity, there are other approaches different from string theory.
For example, look at quantum gravity. And you can get research grants if you do that.
So it's not that extreme. It's not like if you don't work in string theory, you cannot work as a theoretical physicist in academia.
But it is true what you say that string theory is certainly the dominating part of today's research in theoretical physics.
And it's also very true that the academic environment tends to enforce some conformity over scientists and especially young scientists.
And you basically have to do what you're told. And you have to do research in the fields that are recommended.
It has always been like that. It's nothing new. And they don't like that state of things very much.
Yeah, I think it's just a consequence of making things into institutions, right? That then they'll be driven on the basis of politics and business rather than the search for truth.
Of course. You know, it's exactly the same thing that you were saying before about religion.
It's basically a human thing. And at some point, everything becomes entangled with power dynamics and these things.
It doesn't happen in science only. It doesn't happen in religion only. It does happen everywhere.
It's a human state.
It is.
And this is something that you think will be translated into early versions of more comprehensive AI, or this is something that for AI to reach its full potential, it has to break through it.
And if that's the case, it doesn't really matter what the human perspective is, because it will be everything.
Okay, let's think about what AI is first. At this moment, the only examples of AI that we know and we understand are not intelligent at all.
What do I mean with that? Looking at things like the fact that now a supercomputer can beat the best human players at Go, which used to be considered as an extremely difficult game beyond the capability of any machine just a few years ago.
These are really impressive things. But it does not mean that that supercomputer, AlphaGo, is intelligent.
It means that it can do one thing very well. Very well and very fast. Much better and much faster than us.
In this specific case, much faster than us. But knowing how to do one thing very well does not mean being an intelligent being.
And what we call AGI, artificial general intelligence, is still missing. And I personally think that it's not beyond the corner at all.
I mean, we will, I think, develop real human-like artificial intelligence sooner or later. But I don't think it will be that soon.
We will develop it someday. And soon after that, we will be thinking about super-intelligent AI, which means AI much smarter than humans.
And here is a quote from Nick Bostrom's book, which I'd like to repeat. We are not talking about much smarter in the sense that one person is smarter than another.
We are really talking about much smarter in the sense that we are smarter than vehicles.
It's a huge difference in order of magnitude. And it's very difficult for us to even imagine what the thoughts and the motivations of these super-intelligent AIs could be.
But how do you say that? And also because I don't think the process will be very fast. It will not be like one day there is nothing and the day after that there is a God-like super-intelligent AI.
I see things happening much more gradually than that. And there will be ample opportunities for coevolution of humans and machines, as Ray Kurzweil has said many times.
Humans and machines will eventually emerge and become so deeply entangled that it will be very difficult to separate them.
And it will be very difficult to say which is which. Not only difficult, but also pointless perhaps. That's the evolution that we are moving forward towards.
What would be the test to see whether or not artificial intelligence has reached the human level intelligence? Is it still Turing test?
I know that you're a co-founder of the Turing Church and I'm very interested to know more about that.
But do you think that the Turing test is still something that is viable for defining whether or not it's not anymore?
No. The Turing test is defined as follows.
If you talk to a machine, for example, chatting on a computer screen, and if you are not able to tell the difference between that machine and the human, then that machine has passed the Turing test.
Now, we already have machines that are very close to passing the Turing test in the sense of being able to fool everyone into thinking that they are human.
Now, this is not the case of those limited artificial intelligence systems that you talk to when you want to book a flight or something like that.
Not narrow, but the research frontier of artificial intelligence is moving toward producing systems that I think will be able to pass the Turing test very soon.
But that's not yet human-like artificial intelligence and consciousness, whatever it is, is still missing from the equation and I think could remain missing for quite a long time.
So I don't think we are on the verge of achieving real artificial intelligence. We are moving toward that, sure, but it's not going to happen next week.
Yes, so we are building the thinking mind in the artificial sense of a way, but we are not the way that the brain is split between right brain and left brain. We are making the left brain into an artificially built kind of an intelligence, but the right brain where intuition, I guess, and consciousness and these kind of terms, we can't even define them.
Like we throw them around, but we don't really know what they mean.
Something like that. We are building some elements of artificial intelligence, but we are not even too close to understand what other necessary elements are. And consciousness, intuition, as you say, are examples.
So for that intelligence to reach its full potential, do you think that humans at some point will be on the way of it, that we just need to get out of the way and let the machines take control, not completely take control, but like what we discussed, that we can't even define consciousness.
There is no point even discussing whether or not we can build it, but maybe machines will have a much better understanding of it, but humans will be on the way of the research and finding the truth about that.
I cannot deny this possibility. I prefer to be more optimistic myself, and I prefer to think that we'll be co-evolving with machines and gradually emerging with machines like we were discussing a few minutes ago.
Would you talk a little about the Turing Church?
Sure. First, the Turing Church is not a church, in the sense that it is not an organized religion.
As a matter of fact, strictly speaking, the Turing Church is the name of a scientific conjecture due to Alan Turing and Alonso Church.
The conjecture can be formulated in many ways, one of which being that what a certain computer of a certain complexity can do, another computer of equivalent complexity can do.
This conjecture points to things like the ultimate feasibility of mind uploading and the merging between humans and machines.
The name Turing Church is a tongue-in-cheek name, but having said that, it has some of the features of a church.
At this point, the Turing Church is a discussion group with a wide presence on the web and the social networks on the intersections between religion, science, engineering, science fiction, space, all that.
I have been asked many times whether I want to launch the Turing Church as an organized religion.
I have been thinking about that, but the answer that I give to myself and that I have given others is that I don't think there is any need.
I don't think there is any need, because the need of an organized religion where these kinds of things can be discussed is already provided by things like the Christian Transhumanist Association or the Mormon Transhumanist Association, of both of which I am a member.
As far as organization is concerned, I do prefer to leave things in their hands.
If a Turing Church is a religion, then it's a very disorganized one by design.
That seems to be the more appropriate kind of an approach to having any kind of a religion at this point.
I think so also because there are people who want to be believers, and there are also those who don't want to be believers.
For the first kind of people, those who like to belong to an organized religion, we already have many established organized religions like Christianity.
And there are organizations within those religions like the Mormon Transhumanist Association, the Christian Transhumanist Association.
I have met people who are already thinking of an Islamic Transhumanist Association too.
Within established religions, there are already discussion spaces for believers where these things are discussed.
Now, when you come to the other group of people, those who want to stay as far as possible from organized religion,
because of many personal reasons, because of bad experience that they had with organized religions,
or because they think organized religions have not been entirely positive in their effects.
Also that power corrupts, absolute power corrupts absolutely.
That's very true. For this kind of people who want to stay very far from organized religions,
then perhaps the Turing Church disorganization or non-religion can play a role equivalent to religion for important things like personal happiness and peace of mind.
So what is the main contribution of religion at this point? Is it ethics and morality or is there something else that religion can provide for people at this point right now?
Well, not only right now, it has always been like that. The main benefit of religion is the possibility to think that you will live again after death and you will see your loved ones again.
That's the whole point.
That's not the whole point, but I think that is the main point.
But what about ethics and morality? Because you said you're not interested in the prescriptions side of it, and I see ethics and morality exactly as that.
And it's also interesting to talk about whether or not ethics and morality themselves are objective,
because if they're not objective, then there is no point of having any kind of an organized, objective kind of an approach towards them.
Yes. In fact, in the classification between cosmology and geography that I was describing at the beginning,
I think ethics and morality belong to the category of geography because they are very much human dependent and they are very much dependent on one specific place and time in history.
On the other hand, I understand that for most people, of course, ethics and morality are an extremely important thing.
But I myself tend not to talk too much about ethics and morality.
It's not that I don't think about these things, but I don't think I have a really useful contribution to make.
And once again, in the religious transhumanist groups that I mentioned, there is a lot of discussion on ethics and morality.
So once again, I'd like to encourage everyone to get information of the Mormon and Christian transhumanist associations.
I don't think I can do better than that on the theme of ethics and morality.
Yeah, I understand. I had Lincoln Cannon, who I believe he started Mormon Transhumanist Association a couple of years ago.
And I think he's a wonderful man and a very nice person.
But I think Mormonism in Mormon Transhumanist Association is benefiting from transhumanist side much more than the transhumanist side is benefiting from Mormonism.
I don't really think so.
How?
I don't really think so, because if you look at what the founding fathers of the Mormon religions have said in the 19th century,
you find out that a lot of the concepts that we described in transhumanist were there, not very similar concepts, exactly the same concepts,
like the potential for humans to become godlike, like the fact that reality does not have separate material and spiritual parts,
but everything is entangled. As Joseph Smith said, the spirit is a refined form of matter.
All these things can be found in the writings of the fathers of the Mormon religions with some very clearly transhumanist concepts.
As a matter of fact, Mormonism is unique because, for example, if you think of mainstream Christianity,
it is also possible to find these concepts in mainstream Christianity, but it's much more difficult to find these things in Mormonism.
It's very easy because they have been written a couple of centuries ago by the people who are still considered as the prophets of the Mormon religion.
I really think Mormonism is a perfect match for transhumanism. Of course, Mormonism has that geographic part.
For example, I am European and a coffee drinker. When I go to Utah, I find that they don't drink coffee, they don't drink anything hot,
they don't do this and they don't do that. These kinds of prescriptions are extremely far from me, and I don't care about that at all.
I think this is a difference, but it's not a difference that matters that much. I like to drink coffee, I don't like to drink coffee, and that's it.
Within the context of religion, I do agree that Mormonism is the most compatible with transhumanism,
but my point is that why the concept of transhumanism, which I see it as a decentralized concept,
we talked a little about how it differs science and technology and the way that we are looking at the truth compared to organized religion.
To make an organized religion into a transhumanist movement, and I know that the Mormon Transhumanist Association
has a lot of disagreement within the Mormon community as well with more conventional, fundamentalist Mormons,
but at the same time, I just see it that yes, there are teachings and there are perspectives that are more aligned with transhumanism compared to other religions,
but at the same time, it comes with a lot of other things that has absolutely nothing to do with this quest of human evolution
and finding the truth and technological evolution overall.
It does, but at least from my point of view, the parallels are much more important than the differences.
And from the point of view of people in the Mormon Transhumanist Association as well.
Now, if you ask the same question to some Mormon in the street who has never heard of transhumanism,
now they could see things differently, of course.
Do you feel the same way about Scientology?
I don't really know that much about Scientology.
If, for example, somebody starts...
Luca, whatever I say about Scientology would be stupid because I know almost nothing about it.
If somebody start a Scientologist transhumanist organizations, because I'm sure we can find some things that will be aligned with the big picture and the philosophy,
would that be something that you'd be interested to look further into or become a member of just because there are some similarities
considering everything else that can be completely in opposition to the values that, let's say, transhumanist movement has?
Since I'm a curious person, I would certainly take a look and try to understand as quickly as possible what it is that they are actually saying.
On the basis of what I have seen so far, I don't think I would be inclined to explore further after a first look, but of course I would be wrong.
Right. Well, that's consistent, the curiosity part that you say, and I totally share that.
A few months ago when I was in L.A., they took me to a big Scientology church and I had the picture of me taken.
And they put it on Instagram saying something like, what are the lessons that I should learn from my big brother?
But it was really a joke. I have never failed the need to explore Scientology in more detail. Perhaps I'm wrong, of course.
Yeah, I mean, anything can have, like you said, something to contribute depending on the perspective, right?
I think so. I most definitely think so.
Physics is based, understanding of physics is based on understanding of mathematics. Is that right?
You know, I tend to think that there is understanding of mathematics that is based on understanding of physics.
You find the reasoning.
It's like chicken and egg.
Yeah, you find the reasoning behind all that in my book.
But it's certain that mathematics and physics are very strongly interlinked.
So do you think...
Which unfortunately is not the case or is not the case yet for mathematics and biology or mathematics and psychology or mathematics and basically any other science besides physics.
Do you think mathematics was discovered or invented?
Mathematics is certainly suggested by the physical world.
There is a very interesting book called something like Where Mathematics Come From, written by cognitive scientists.
But they argue that the kind of mathematics that we have developed is and can only be very strongly constrained by facts.
Like, for example, that we have ten fingers on which we can count things and that we are able to estimate sizes and distances of things.
I wouldn't say discovered or invented, but I would say that the concepts of mathematics that we have developed are very much influenced by the physical world and our way, our human way of interacting with the physical world.
So perhaps beings are very different from us.
Imaging, for example, the plasma beings that have been described by some science fiction authors like Fred Hoyle.
I think these beings could develop concepts of mathematics very different from ours.
Interesting. The reason I ask is because some people make the argument that the uncertainty that we are experiencing, let's say in the waves in the ocean or the flocks of birds flying, we can't really measure them because they're not quantifiable.
And when they're quantifiable, they can be predicted.
And that would be on the basis of mathematics through which algorithms they can make sense out of them.
So it's interesting to me whether or not mathematics is in a way a fabric of this reality that we're experiencing or maybe a layer of the fabric of the reality that we're experiencing, whereas something that is basically developed by human understanding of reality and it will at some point reach its limits because of it.
I don't know, of course, because nobody does, but I can very much appreciate this point of view.
What are your thoughts on Neuralink?
The idea of augmenting our cognitive ability rather than building a model of a human brain inside of a machine.
I really hope Elon Musk will show some Neuralink prototypes someday.
We haven't really seen much so far.
One event last year.
Yes, but it didn't really show prototypes that we can test.
I believe he's saying that they will show something soon.
Now, what is Neuralink going to be?
It's going to be some kind of brain-to-computer interface which will permit doing some interesting things.
I would still see it as a baby step.
It will help paralyze people to move around, and that's something good.
It will help people to send tweets by thought, and that's also a cool gadget.
By real brain-to-computer interface, I mean something by which I can achieve a very deep integration between my mind and the computer.
That, I think, will come someday, but we're still far from it.
Ben Goertzel, who I'm sure you're familiar with, his Singularity Net approach is that artificial general intelligence will be the result of millions and millions of different AIs on the basis of a decentralized platform.
This is different than the approach that, let's say, DeepMind has, or Google is having, that it's a centrally controlled artificial intelligence. Basically, they will have control over data.
To me, that's really what comes down to, whether or not humans will have their data dependency on a centralized organization or a structure of authority or a decentralized kind of a platform.
Do you think there is any certainty of which approach would be, quote-unquote, the right approach towards what you're talking about, human mind and machines becoming one?
For what concern? Artificial intelligence. There is no reason why both approaches couldn't be right. There is not only one way of doing things.
In many cases, we find that there are many different ways to do things, and each specific way has its advantages and disadvantages compared to the others.
I would expect that will apply to research in artificial intelligence as well.
When it comes to interfacing machines with human brains, then I think we have to take the architecture of the human brain into account.
We do know the architecture of our machines, because we have built these machines, but there are still things, and perhaps there are still many things, that we don't know about the architecture of our own brains.
So when it comes to brain-machine interfacing, I guess the best, most efficient, most useful approach will be the approach that more faithfully exploits the specific architecture, the specific cognitive architecture of our brain.
Which would be centralized?
Many people would answer yes. Let me be a bit more open and say perhaps.
Because the way that we are experiencing right now with big tech companies, manipulation of data, and basically evaluating what is good, what is bad, what is right, what is wrong, in a very small scale, what it is right now.
But we are seeing that it has huge social impacts, whether it's on Twitter or Facebook or YouTube.
Some people can make the argument that, well, what is the point of having a chip inside my brain, just using the term that people would use, and then Google would own all my thoughts and all the data that is coming out.
And the contrast to that is that you have a decentralized platform, that nobody would have any kind of a control or any kind of authority over evaluating your thoughts and data.
Hold on, hold on. Unfortunately, decentralization does not mean freedom from control.
Simple example, just think of Bitcoin, which started as an incarnation of the libertarian dream of complete decentralization and invulnerability from government control.
And just see what happens. Now they can monitor each and every Bitcoin transaction. And if you are not extremely careful, they can immediately trace it back to you.
It's always a leapfrog thing. There are technologies that can be used for surveillance. Then someone will develop countermeasures for that. But then someone else would develop countermeasures and so on.
It's like a thing that goes on and on with one leapfrogging, the other and so forth. And if you want to predict who will win, it is very difficult because on the one hand, the authorities have all the money.
On the other hand, the hackers are usually smarter and more motivated. So who wins at the end, who knows, is one of those uncomputable problems that I like to write about.
Yeah. And also this conflict that is caused by it, it seems to be just as natural and the rest of the aspect of humanity. Someone comes with a tool and somebody else comes with a counter of it.
Exactly.
Let me just ask you about SpaceX's latest launch. I was there, a lot of people were there, very, very excited about it.
I was there glued to the TV all the time. It was really historic. It was glorious, unfortunately. From Europe, I have to watch it on TV.
But I would have a really light to watch with my eyes. It was a beautiful moment. It was a beautiful moment because it marked the beginning of an era in which commercial space companies are going to be more and more actively involved in space exploration.
And it marked the first use with human astronauts of the technology of reusable launchers, which promises a really big reduction in the cost of space launch.
And as you know, once you reduce the cost of access to space, which has been the limiting factor so far, you know, everything can happen.
So I really do praise NASA, Jim Bridenstine, Elon Musk, the astronauts and all the team for this huge achievement. And I would like to see more and more of that.
Now, the current US administration has said that they plan to send people on the moon by 2024.
I think that would be perhaps a little bit unrealistic. But I really hope to see human astronauts walking on the moon by the end of this decade.
And how far until we get to Mars?
We could go to Mars the day after, perhaps. That's what Elon Musk wants to do. He would like perhaps even to go directly to Mars without establishing an outpost on the moon first.
I think it's going to take still some time before we are ready for the establishment of a massive colony on Mars.
I'd like to see it, of course. But realistically, I don't think I will. In the meantime, there is a lot of useful experience that can be gained by starting using industrially the resources on the moon.
And in that sense, I think a sustainable return to the moon is a necessary step for further expansion into the solar system.
And then perhaps, when the time is right, for expansion into interstellar space.
Yeah, I think it was great. It was my second launch that I saw. The first one was Falcon Heavy. And seeing those two Falcons coming back down, it really was a spiritual experience.
And it was a very solid understanding for me how we are finding more about ourselves through this quest of learning more about science and technology and building better tools.
It seems like we are living in a time that everything is coming together in a way that we have to address them and we have to understand them in order to take another step forward.
It's a beautiful time, but at the same time, there are a lot of things that are happening that people can be like, oh, the world is falling apart and all that.
Of course. But maybe it has always been like that. And it will always be like that.
Yeah. Giulio, what is next for you and where can our audience follow your work?
My main website is curingchurch.net. And if you go to my website, then first I think you will read my book, which is called Tales of the Curing Church, Hacking Religion, Enlightening Science, Awakening Technology.
I hope you will buy my book, which is very cheap. But if you cannot buy my book, don't worry, because there is also a free version online.
Then read the latest essays and especially join our groups on Facebook and other social media.
And just let us know. I'm always happy to interact with newcomers.
Excellent. Awesome. Let me ask you the last question I ask all my guests.
If you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you say is the worst thing humanity has done?
And what would you say is our greatest achievement?
The worst thing that humanity has done and our greatest achievement?
You know, that's a very difficult question.
Let me just think because I wasn't expecting this.
That's good.
The greatest achievement is that after having done many stupid things and after having done many bad things,
and I'm referring here to all the atrocities that have been committed by all civilization throughout the whole of history,
after having done these very bad things, we are here now and we are thinking of how we can avoid doing other bad things in the future.
And we are still thinking of how we could ever become a more kind and gentle civilization.
Thank you.
