What happens is that when we're insecure because of rapid change, we tend to react by saying,
this is what worked in the past, and we become more committed to doing precisely what we
did in the past.
So we try to impose past solutions on future problems, but that doesn't work.
Hello and welcome to the 66th episode of Near Human Podcasts at Magabahari Edicologist
on Twitter and Instagram, and you can follow this show on liveinlimbo.com, iTunes, YouTube,
and BitChute.
And today with me, I have the pleasure of having William Davido, the legend of Silicon
Valley.
Thank you so much for your time and being here, Bill.
Well, thank you for having me.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's an honor.
Just to give our audience some more familiarity with you, let's start with your background,
the work you've done, the lives you've lived, and what are you mainly focused on now these
days?
Okay, well, you know, in 1957, I thought I would save the world from Russia when Sputnik
was launched.
How old were you then?
Oh, I was 22.
And the professor announced that Russia had launched Sputnik, and I thought if you have
a grain of technology in your blood, you better study technology and help us win the space
race.
And that started me on a path that led me to Silicon Valley.
And I ultimately ended up running the microprocessor area at Intel and then doing some venture
capitalism, and then at some point, I decided I would try and write a book.
So I did, and you are about to talk to me about my most recent book.
Absolutely, which the book is called The Autonomous Revolution Reclaiming the Future.
We have sold to machines.
You were with Intel since the very beginning, am I right?
Well, I joined them in 1973.
They were five years old, but they were $66 million.
And when I left them in 1985, we were $1.6 billion.
Wow.
Are you impressed by the kind of advancement in chip making and hardware, considering you
know exactly what's been going on, you know the evolution of it, or you're not impressed
because you know all the possibilities that are ahead?
Well, I am tremendously impressed with what we did with the microprocessor.
But you've got to understand that what we did then was very different than what is going
on now.
At that time, with the microprocessor, we were improving the world the way it was.
Like we were making cash registers better and stoplights better and things like that.
And that's very different than what is going on now, where we're changing the social structure
of the world.
And if I look back on it, the rate of advance was really slow.
We were doubling chip density at the rate of 40% a year.
That's a factor of a thousand in 20 years.
I suspect that the internet reduced the cost of communication by a factor of a million,
probably in less than 10 years.
So we're dealing with rates of change or rates of improvement that are a thousand times faster
than what the semiconductor did.
And this rate, would you say, is an inevitable outcome of exponential rate of growth, technological
growth?
Is that right?
Well, it's just all these advances that are taking place in a new world.
We're living in virtual space, which frees us from the limitations of physical space.
And so we've moved from the physical space for which we were adapted to the virtual space
where things happen very quickly for which we're maladapted.
Now before getting into the book, I just want to bring this up for our audience and get
your response to it because you consider what is happening as the third industrial revolution,
I would say.
You tweeted that for the third time in the history of humanity, civilization is undergoing
faith change.
The first was the agricultural revolution.
The second, the industrial revolution.
We are now in the midst of the autonomous revolution.
Now what we are hearing more and more is the fourth industrial revolution that just to
give a definition to our audience, the world economic based on what World Economic Forum
has talked about.
Again, the first industrial is agriculture, second is industrial.
They're saying that the third used electronics and information technology to automate production.
Now a fourth industrial revolution is building the world on the third, the digital revolution
that has been occurring since the middle of the last century.
So how do you see it as only the third, not the fourth?
Well, this is not an extension of the industrial revolution.
The industrial revolution, as far as I'm concerned, has come to an end.
What happened in the various phases of the industrial revolutions is that we made technological
advances, but the forms of our institutions remained the same, like we replaced the handwritten
spreadsheet with Excel, but we still did accounting in firms the same way.
We replaced steam power with electrical power, but we still had factories.
Suddenly, what is happening and why this is not an extension of the industrial revolution
is that the form of what we are doing is changing.
A bank becomes a cell phone application.
It vanishes into virtual space.
That's very different.
The factory did not vanish in the industrial revolution.
It just changed and became more efficient.
Yeah, they're also seeing it as maybe the extension of the third, as they're calling
it, industrial revolution that started in the mid of 20th century by building computers
and chips and then it led to internet and all that.
Yeah, I think the biggest mistake we can make is to think that this is business as usual
with just a little change.
What is happening today is something very fundamental.
Think of what happened during the agricultural revolution.
We had the agricultural revolution and the form of government changed.
We went from being tribal chiefs to having kings and city states.
We used to deal with barter.
We invented money and suddenly we had exchange and markets.
When the industrial revolution came along, we changed very differently.
Most of us prior to the industrial revolution were entrepreneurs.
We worked on farms and lived by what we produced or we were in a cottage industry and made
clothes and shoes that we sold to others.
After the industrial revolution, we became a dependent civilization.
We depended on others to pay us to do work.
That happened that we created the job as a result of that.
Before the industrial revolution, we had small government.
After the industrial revolution, government grew from 3% of GDP to around 40% of GDP today.
These are things and those are what we call social phase changes.
They are very different from just improving the efficiency of society.
What made you write this book at this point?
Was it any specific kind of an event or you just see the trend that is building writing
the book The Autonomous Revolution Reclaiming the Future We've Sold to Machines?
I had three objectives in writing the book.
Number one, I like to write, so it's kind of fun.
It's kind of like being a painter.
The other one was I thought it would be fun to talk to local groups just to get to know
people in the community better.
The third one was the thing I really hope will happen, which is that I hope that I could
influence the thinking of a thousand policymakers so that we wouldn't just treat this as being
just a little bit different than in the past.
We're going to have to think about how we distribute wealth in the future.
You see, in the past, the fundamental mechanism for distributing wealth was the job.
That's how we put money in people's pockets.
If there was a shortage of work, then a lot of people can't participate in that mechanism.
We've got to think about new mechanisms for distributing wealth.
How well do you see our politicians doing this job?
So far, I only can think of Andrew Yang, who's been talking about the... I'm talking about
him beyond the partisan kind of structure because the partisan structure seems to be
counter to measures that need to be taken in order to adopt into what's coming technologically
speaking.
What happens is that when we're insecure because of rapid change, we tend to react by saying,
this is what worked in the past, and we become more committed to doing precisely what we
did in the past.
We try to impose past solutions on future problems.
That doesn't work.
New problems require new solutions.
We have to do those things.
Most of what people are talking about, as far as I'm concerned today, is they're talking
about doing conventional solutions to future problems.
I hope that the free market will create lots of jobs.
I hope that by reducing taxes and getting rid of red tape, it will do enough.
I hope that by creating, moving more manufacturing back, it will help solve the problem.
But I would like to give you sort of a counter example here to think about.
Every time we have gone through one of these social phase changes, we have dramatically
changed the physical infrastructure of our society, like we went from living on farms
to living in cities.
In the future, with the autonomous revolution, it is highly likely that we will have a different
physical infrastructure associated with our society.
I'm not talking about fixing sewers.
I'm saying, hey, maybe people will want to repurpose office buildings and shopping centers.
Maybe they will want to return to living in living cities, which will have more parks.
Maybe they will think sitting in traffic for two hours isn't a good idea.
They're going to want more public transportation, all of those things.
Today we spend 5% of the gross national product on construction.
Maybe in the future we'll be spending 10 or 15% on construction because we will be rebuilding
our physical environment to match the needs of the future.
That would create a lot of jobs.
It's a matter of prioritization too, right?
It takes a body, whether a government or a corporation or whoever, to detect problems,
prioritize them, and come up with solutions.
It just seems like this debacle of bureaucracy that is happening, for example, in the United
States, politically speaking, is just counterproductive to the measures that need to be taken appropriately
to the speed of technological growth.
I believe that there are conservative solutions to the problem, and I believe there are liberal
solutions to the problem.
What is important is that you say, I've got a purpose and a goal, and we all get behind
a certain set of solutions and work to make them work.
Maybe we're not going to pick the optimum solution.
When I was in business, we seldom picked the perfect solution, but as a management team
at Intel, we all said, hey, we've done the best we could to find the solution.
Now let's make the solution work.
That's what we did during the Second World War.
That's what we've done when we faced other crises.
We've made the solution we picked work.
I think this is a very interesting time to talk about solutions too.
We're going through this coronavirus pandemic and see how quickly they respond to it with
respect to coming up with solutions.
That's an example of the fact that probably the biggest threats in our future are going
to be pandemics and bioterrorism.
This one should have convinced us that a pandemic can be a pretty devastating thing.
If you look at it, we have had SARS and MERS and things like this that we've gotten control
of because they weren't quite as bad.
Now we're faced with something that's a real challenge.
We've got to put in place new kinds of solutions to deal with this.
Yeah, absolutely.
Would you talk about some of the elements of this autonomous revolution?
For a lot of people, autonomous cars now becoming more and more familiar kind of an aspect,
but obviously this is not something that is going to be limited to autonomous cars.
No.
What I think is going to happen is that our institutions quite broadly are going to be
restructured.
For example, I looked at finance during this, 8 million people are employed in finance.
What finance is, is basically an information application.
If you look at it, you've got a bank and it's a physical building, but it's an information
application.
What goes on inside it is all information processing.
We're matching buyers and sellers and doing things like this and we're transferring money
around and suddenly we can do all of that virtually.
We may even have new forms of money.
There is an example of the autonomous revolution in finance and maybe 8 million people work
in finance today.
In the future, it could be 4 million, it could be 2 million, but it's obvious that a lot
of things are going to be happening.
If you look across the business world, what I tell people is, look at that office building.
It's got offices and elevators and desks and it's got information network.
People talk to one another.
They send around notes and they're on computer files and then it's got a memory or a file
network.
People store stuff in their brains and it's in file cabinets and it's on the network and
it's got an audio response system, people talking on the phone and an audio recognition
system, people listening when phone calls come in and all of that can be a few racks
of electronics and suddenly you move a call center that employs 2,000 people in India
to a few boxes of electronics in North Dakota.
These are the kinds of transmissions that happen when you move things from a physical
world to a virtual world.
I think what freaks people out a lot is this comparison that the job that 2,000 people
are doing, it can be done by a few racks of computation.
They cannot just grasp that, hey, I can be replaced, what I'm offering can be replaced,
but not only that, it's that people are not realizing that we've already started merging
with technology and machines since we started using tools.
They don't see it like that.
Well, look, there are a lot of things that we don't see.
For example, there's a lot of socially useful work that has zero monetary value in our society.
I look at it and if you are raising children and you want to go to the office, you drop
them off with childcare and pay somebody to take care of them.
Did we ever think about paying people to stay at home and raise their children?
Well, we'll give you money to subsidize childcare, but if you have somebody else do it, we won't
give you money to raise your own kids.
We're going to have to be willing to think about adopting different perspectives.
I'm not saying that's the right solution to the problem, but we're going to have to think
differently in the future.
Yeah, absolutely, because it's very obvious that any technology works as well as a society
that adopts it.
One of the reasons that I'm bringing these up, because I think, for example, Google Glass
was a very good example that, and we've talked about this before, that it was not even available
to be bought.
It had to be given to certain people creating this elite group of individuals in San Francisco
and area and in many cases they were getting attacked by people who were not wearing those
glasses.
Yeah, well, I mean, I don't know how to respond to that.
Well one of the responses that I got from the chairman of transhumanist party here in
the US was that people felt they're being left out, that this is something that they
can't even buy.
It has to be given to them by a company and creating this elite group of people was not
something that was received well by the community.
Well I think we have a problem with elitism in the country today and you know, when I
came to Silicon Valley, which was 1959, it was really egalitarian and we valued people
by what they contributed and when I say that, I mean, I think we valued policemen and school
teachers and everybody and it was my experience that the managements of those companies were
really very egalitarian.
I mean, I worked for Hewlett Packard and Dave Packard used to cook the hamburgers at the
company picnic and he was out in the community and he was on the factory floor and Dave Packard
valued people based on their values and what they contributed and not on their net worth.
Yeah, we have to deal with it, absolutely.
Let's talk about use autonomous vehicles as an example because the information that is
being harvested in order to make an autonomous system functional, one of the concerns is
that that set of data will be owned by a centralized structure of authority, whether it's going
to be Google or whether it's Microsoft or any other company and this would just continue
this trend of getting users data without paying them any compensation or the users having
any kind of a control over their data.
How are we going to deal with moving forward?
Well, I fundamentally believe that there is no freedom if you don't have privacy and that
is an issue that as far as I'm concerned, maybe we'll develop technologies like blockchain
that will enable us to do this but I think it's a government issue and I believe that
I should own my own information and if you look at it, let me give you the example.
My capital equipment is my car and my computer and my cell phone.
I am using my capital equipment and the people who are appropriating my data are using the
product that I produced on my capital equipment.
If I was running a factory using my capital equipment, putting product on the shipping
dock and you were taking it off the shipping dock, you'd be in jail and because this stuff
is intangible, we don't deal with it the same way that we do with tangible things but the
world of the future, intangible things have in many cases more valuable than tangible
ones but the law hasn't caught up with it.
If I write a song, people can take it from me and not compensate me now and these new
technologies make a lot of things possible that were not possible in the past and they
make cybercrime possible but they make new kinds of theft possible as well and one of
the things that you're stealing from me is my privacy.
Whenever we talk about universal basic income because that seems to be like an inevitable
kind of step for people who will be losing their job, my opinion is that why can't we
get paid for the data that we produce and share with these companies based on the contribution?
One of the things that we suggested in the book was that we create information fiduciaries
where all of that data would be resident with the information fiduciary kind of like a safety
deposit box and then that as the owner of this, if I wanted free stuff from Google,
I could say you can have this kind of data or if I wanted to buy automobile insurance,
I could say here is my automobile, here's my driver's record, you can have access to
it or other things but I would put me in control of my data and who gets to use it and that
way I could monetize it.
That would probably, I'm guessing, generate a few thousand dollars a year in income for
individuals as well.
And it also be decentralized, right?
Because you're not going to be dependent on, for example, only Google because you can't
decide to share a data with Amazon and then Facebook and what and what and you get money
from all those decentralized sources.
Yeah, and there are other solutions to this.
I've been reading about blockchain and they have a different solution to the problem but
it's obvious that we should do something and when I say one of the things I didn't like
about writing the book is that the publisher said, well, you've got to give us a few solutions
and I said, well, all right, I'll propose something but what I want people to understand
is that there are many solutions to the problem and so I've defined one but there could be
numerous others in case I said an information fiduciary, if you talk to Dan Tapscott, he
would say, hey, blockchain is the way to do it and I don't care how we arrive at the solution,
I just want to see people owning their own information.
But you're optimistic about blockchain?
Well, I think blockchain is a phenomenal technology.
The question is how will we get it embedded in society and it may or may not happen.
I don't take it as a given.
I mean, I think there are going to be lots of important applications but as to whether
it will be the universal solution to a lot of these problems, I'm not equipped to say.
Yeah, perhaps the best known application on blockchain are cryptocurrencies at this point.
Do you see cryptocurrencies as automating a financial system?
I see cryptocurrencies as extremely important and not necessarily Bitcoin but a cryptocurrency
and the reason why is money is to be a unit of account, a store of value and a medium
of exchange.
The worst people I know to create stores of value are governments because what they want
is inflation so that they can pay off their bills.
It turns out that as a medium of exchange, the fees on transferring money are absolutely
horrendous like we have about $3 trillion transferred through credit cards and debit
cards and we pay about $200 billion in fees on those transfers and interest.
That's about 6%.
Why should I spend six cents on every dollar to transfer a dollar?
That makes no sense at all so it looks like there is a better alternative and I can say
I think with a high degree of confidence that cryptocurrencies are going to challenge the
currencies of many developing countries but I also have a feeling that a good cryptocurrency
is going to challenge the euro and the dollar over a period of time and if that happens,
think about the implications of this.
If you talk about form change, one of the things that has enabled our government to
survive and solve problems is that they have had control over their currency.
They've had the ability to print money.
What happens when you take away the ability to print money from the government?
I mean it's a big change and I think that that could happen.
I don't know if it will happen but I think it's a very real possibility.
Oh absolutely.
We're already seeing that government is being challenged in different ways whether it's
Facebook's Libra that they're going through all of these regulatory things.
They haven't even launched it yet or if it's John McAfee who I had on the show and he's
saying I haven't paid taxes for 10 years and anybody who wants to not pay taxes use
cryptocurrencies that are anonymous like Monera and blah, blah, blah, blah.
Governments are being challenged from many different directions already.
Do you have anything to add?
I want to talk about ethics a little because ethics and morality seems to be a very important
yet very blurry aspect of all of this autonomous kind of a world.
Well see we are living in a world where trust has been undermined and I'm going to give
you a real old world example from about 1950 or 60.
When Sonia and I got married in 1965, a lot of my parents and their friends used to go
to Europe and they shopped at a store that sold fine china named Goods and we got china
from people who were at Goods.
One time Sonia and I went to Europe and we visited Goods and it was a great store and
at some point a piece of china got broken and Sonia ordered a piece of china from Goods
which was in England and it arrived and it was not right.
She informed Goods of this and they said we will ship you a replacement and Goods said
to her and she said don't you want to wait until I have returned the item and they said
no you are a customer of Goods.
We today are living in a world where that level of trust does not exist and we're dependent
upon reviews and this and that and the other thing but one of the things that makes the
economy work and one of the things that make relationships between people work is trust.
And currently things like anonymity on the internet and whether it's fake news or fake
truths or things like this but we have to find ways of restoring trust in the economy
or we're going to have real big problems.
Yeah and with respect to for example autonomous vehicles that famous dilemma I guess that
you have an autonomous vehicle that is on that branch of a road and one there's one
baby and the other one there are like five people which one would you kill.
So whatever kind of decision that is going to be made we go back to this lack of trust
that a lot of people will be like well no the other option would have been right.
It seems like a very big kind of a challenge to solve.
Yeah it is because I mean people make mistakes.
My wife and I were talking about autonomous vehicles and autonomous trucks and I said
there's no doubt in my mind that today even at the state of the technology they are safer
than human drivers and I if I look at that objectively I believe it.
If I look at it emotionally I don't and I say you know I know that I'm not going to
make the same mistake that an autonomous vehicle would but I look at my driving today and I'm
not nearly as sharp as I used to be and I'd be much better off with an autonomous chauffeur
even with the technology at this stage.
But it's hard to trust algorithms because algorithms do absolutely stupid things at
times and you know an algorithm is a rigid rule frequently and you know I said I would
love to write rules that say use your best judgment and algorithms don't work that way.
Yeah there's also alignment issue right like best judgment for humans are not necessarily
going to be the best judgment for algorithms just experiencing different realities.
Considering the exponential growth of technology on the basis of Moore's law that was determined
on the basis of silicon and what I'm hearing is that we are reaching the limits of silicon
and we have to enter a new mode of computation.
Quantum computing is one of the candidates but I'm getting from a lot of experts in the
field that they're not that optimistic about the emergence of a functional quantum computing
anytime soon.
What do you think about quantum computing in specific and the next mode of computation
in general after silicon?
I am not an authority on any of this but what I observe is that I am not sure our limitations
are associated anymore with the power of computation.
We are limited not by the power of computation but by our ability to adapt to the applications
as they are currently being structured.
We do not need more technological progress to make vast improvements in our society right
now, more technological improvements in computation.
What would make us better is if we figured out how to apply the improvements we already
have more humanely and what I've told people is that I consider the recent crop of engineers
to be not very good and they look at me and they say, well, they're all technological
geniuses and I look at them and I say, hey, I'm using this stuff and is it making my life
simpler and more efficient?
The answer is that it does not do 100% of what is absolutely critical to me 100% of
the time reliably.
What happens is that I'm constantly getting bogged down in fringe cases where something
surprising happens and I end up spending an incredible amount of time on a fringe case
that I didn't want to have anything to do with anyhow, but I'm trying to get rid of
it.
I'm looking at this and what do I do with my phone?
I just went through it and spent an incredible amount of time turning off alerts.
Is that an iPhone or Android?
I don't want to say.
To me, that's poor engineering and it's not doing for me what I want it to do or I find
that I've got this wonderful electronic calendar system, but for some reason, the software
is not reliable enough for me to use my phone and be 100% certain that it updates all the
other devices.
When I'm out, I don't enter a new event on my phone.
I check for it on my phone, write it down on a piece of paper and come home or make
myself a note on my phone and come home and enter it on my computer so that I show her
that it gets updated throughout the system.
These things are really wonderful conveniences, but if they don't work 100% reliably, 100%
of the time.
Don't upgrade me.
Figure out how to make the stuff you've sold me work reliably.
We just had our home audio system replaced.
The reason was that we had a sophisticated system and I told the guy I wanted the least
sophisticated system and he swore he sold it to me.
It turns out that I ended up with a sophisticated system that worked most of the time or I have
a thermostat that was online and it got software upgraded and my wife couldn't turn on the
furnace on a cold day.
I cut it off from the internet and I'm now probably 30 versions of software behind, but
the furnace always turns on.
These are things that are really important.
You're so right.
How the masses are going to adopt something like that.
Bill's book is called The Autonomous Revolution Reclaiming the Future We've Sold to Machines.
I have two more questions for you.
What do you think about this 5G and the tech rivalry between the United States and China?
I have for a long time thought that we managed our situation with China not well.
This goes back to trade when I was with Intel.
I believe the Chinese are extremely competent and they do a very good job, but their motivations
are frequently not aligned with our best interests.
In that case, we better find a way whether it's with 5G or with the production of drugs
to be not as dependent upon them.
This doesn't say don't do business with them, but we are overly dependent upon them and
we are not demanding enough that they play by the same rules that we play by.
That doesn't mean that they shouldn't have different rules.
That means that when they interface with us, then we've got to get mutual agreement on
what a fair set of rules are because different societies are going to have different rules.
We can't tell China what rules they should have, but we can say, hey, in the places where
we interact, these are the sets of rules you're going to have to abide by and you can't steal
intellectual property, you can't do this, you can't do that, and if you want to do that,
we don't want to do business with you.
Absolutely.
Thank you so much again for your time.
It's been such a pleasure and honor.
Let me ask you the last question I ask all my guests, that if you come across an intelligent
alien from a different civilization, what would you say is the worst thing humanity
has done and what would you say is our greatest achievement?
God, the worst thing?
Well, I was going to say things like genocides, and then I thought, hey, we have also horribly
abused our environment, and we aren't feeling the effects of that, but we will, and I'm
sorry, what was the other thing you wanted to know?
Our greatest achievement.
Well, our greatest achievements are that we've found, I think, a way of adapting to the physical
reality.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
