it's one thing to use genetics to try to cure disease,
it's another thing to change the genetics of our species.
How do you feel about that, changing the genetics of our species?
Well, I'll tell you, it makes no biological sense.
Hello and welcome to the 29th episode of Neohuman Podcast.
I'm Agabahari Adygologist on Instagram and Twitter,
and you can follow the show on liveinlimbo.com, iTunes, and YouTube.
With me today again is Mandy Gray, and with us today we have Dr. Mark Perley,
and thank you so much for your time, Mark.
You're welcome, glad to be here.
Why don't we start by hearing some of your background,
some of the work that you've worked on and what you're working on now these days?
My background is in science and medicine.
I have two PhDs, one in computer science and one in mathematics and a medical degree,
and the work that I've done over the years has been in computer science and genetics
at Carnegie Mellon University, and for the last 20 years,
I've been working at my small company here in Pittsburgh,
we have about 10 people, on getting more information out of DNA data
using computers and statistics.
So when you say DNA data, what are the major uses or what is it used for?
Originally, when we started in the 1990s, it was for genetic diagnosis,
gene mapping, and genome projects, but over the last 15 years,
it's mainly been for forensic identification.
Mark, how have you seen the change in the field with the advancement
of the technology in the past decade, especially in your field?
Well, in forensic identification, it's interesting,
the sort of dichotomous split, you have advances in the ability to generate
high-quality data in high volumes in crime labs from low-level DNA
and from mixtures, most DNA evidence is a mixture of two or more people,
and so the data is phenomenal, but there's also been a parallel development,
which we started on over 15 years ago, of using statistical modeling and computers
in order to separate out this data into the genetic types of the individuals
who left their DNA and determine reliable match statistics.
So that's a separate strand, and while laboratories have been very keen
to adopt improvements in laboratory equipment that help them generate more data,
the adoption of technology that will resolve these DNA signals
without human intervention has been a bit slower.
When you're saying that the sample of DNA is a mixture between two people,
what exactly do you mean by that?
Well, here's several examples.
In a sexual assault, there's two people involved or more, a victim and an assailant.
On a handgun, there'll typically be four or five people
who've touched different surfaces on the gun.
So if you take a swab from the handgun, you'll end up with a signal
that doesn't just have the DNA of one contributor, say the owner of the gun,
but will have DNA from the four, five, or six different people
who've all handled that gun.
And so the type of data that you're getting isn't the very easy DNA from one person
that somebody might watch on television or hear about in high school.
It's a more complex signal that adds together the DNA components from multiple people.
I see. The common belief is that a lot of wrongfully convicted people,
that could have been avoided if we had a more conclusive kind of an evidence.
And DNA evidence have been always pointed out as more of a conclusive and definitive kind of an evidence.
How accurate that statement would be in your opinion?
Well, the idea is how informative is the information that you're getting.
The methods that crime labs traditionally have used over the last 15 years for DNA mixtures
tend to be limited in that only some of the data is used.
And the conclusions tend to be inclusionary statistically, not exclusionary.
Newer computer methods can provide an exclusionary score showing the extent to which somebody
hasn't contributed their DNA as well as the degree to which someone else may have contributed their DNA.
So these newer methods that are computer based and statistical are a boon for being able to exonerate people
and provide exculpatory evidence that somebody's DNA was not present on an item at a crime scene.
Right. So over the last couple of weeks, we've talked a little bit about the reluctance of the courts to embrace technology.
Has that been your experience or where have the courts landed on the introduction of this evidence
or even just like at the investigative level amongst police officers, for example?
We've seen fairly good acceptance of cyber genetics started out over 15 years ago, doing a lot of validations.
We had a grant from the Department of Justice 15 years ago to validate this mixture separation technology for DNA that we were developing.
And to date, there have been 34 validation studies, seven of them published in peer review journals,
that show the effectiveness of our true allele system in producing reliable match statistics, whether inclusionary or exclusionary.
So when we go to court, if there is some sort of a challenge from an opposition,
then the questions that the court really focus on is what's the scientific reliability?
I don't know if you've talked in your show about issues of courtroom acceptability, such as Daubert or Frye.
But there are certain criteria, certainly in the United States, and they involve typically the general acceptance of a method.
But particularly since 1993 in the Daubert decision, the federal government and most of the states embrace a more scientific criteria for judges to consider.
And the main three criteria are is a method inherently testable or is it not testable at all?
Does it have an error rate? Can you produce an error rate to show how often it succeeds or fails?
And has the method been accepted by peer review and demonstrated to actually work?
So given the emphasis that we have put and other groups as well on validating scientific methods,
that's helped with courts accepting it as of today.
There have been 10 challenges out of the 400 cases we've done, and the courts have accepted Trualiel as reliable scientific evidence in all of those cases.
Right. So you've been called then, I guess, as an expert witness to testify to the validity of it then? Is that how it works?
So in a criminal trial, say in about maybe 5% of cases, an opposition, no matter which side happens to be presenting your evidence, can ask for a hearing.
I think it may be called a voir dire hearing in Canada. That's what it's called in the United Kingdom and in Australia.
And actually, Trualiel has had those voir dires in Northern Ireland and Australia, which went well.
And at those hearings, it's up to the judge, serving as a gatekeeper, to decide on reliability.
In most cases, there is no challenge because the science is seen to be acceptable and a judge will either not allow a challenge
or the opposing side doesn't ask for one because it doesn't get you very far.
I mean, in theory, you could ask for a scientific challenge every time you go to court.
You could ask, does the sun shine during the day?
That could be an objection. And if the judge grants it, you could have a hearing on meteorology.
So you can always challenge evidence. But I think the result of Trualiel having been in the courts for since 2009,
I've testified in almost 50 cases and there are six crime labs in the United States that are using Trualiel regularly.
It sort of has a general acceptance as a valid method and is particularly based on validation studies.
Right. So is it being introduced then by the state prosecutor and then opposed by the defense counsel?
Is that usually how it goes down?
That's usually how it goes. Though this year, we had some interesting cases where we were assisting the defense.
There was one case in upstate New York, which is sort of near you, where we used Trualiel to analyze about 150 items of evidence
in the people of New York versus Nick Hillary case.
And what we helped the defense show was that the evidence that was introduced by the prosecution
was subjective and the answer could have gone either way, depending on the data that was used.
If you used some data, the prosecutor's software could reach one conclusion.
If you use more data, you could reach another conclusion.
And when we ran the same data through Trualiel on all the evidence,
we saw there was no statistical support for the defendant, Nick Hillary, being in the data.
We also had two exonerations in Indiana this year.
The second one is just happening this week. The first one was in April.
And there there was a case of an individual, Darrell Pinkins, and two of his colleagues who were
it falsely convicted of a crime they couldn't possibly have committed.
It was a very vicious gang rape.
There was a group of criminals going around in northern Indiana bumping into cars on the motorway.
And when the passenger got out of the car, they would rob them.
And then the robins turned to beatings. Then they turned to rapes.
Then they turned to robbing, rapes, beatings, everything.
And what had happened with Mr. Pinkins and some of his co-workers is that the coveralls,
the uniforms that they had at work, were stolen from their car.
These coveralls were found back in the late 1980s at this crime scene.
And two of them were convicted of participating in the gang rape.
The DNA evidence that would later exonerate them actually existed in 2001.
But the interpretation methods that were used then and are still prevalent now
weren't able to get at the smaller components of the mixture.
They couldn't identify the five or ten percent components.
And after we analyzed the same data from 15 years ago,
because that's what our computer does. We don't work with DNA wet samples.
We just work with the data that comes out of the lab.
We were able to establish that there were five individuals present at this crime scene.
Three of them were brothers and none of them were the defendants.
And so in April, Darrell Pinkins walked out of jail after having
been wrongfully imprisoned for 24 years.
So same evidence, just the interpretation of it was improved because of the technology advancement, correct?
Exactly.
Do you see that all these successful cases is paving the road towards the future where
we're using biology and genetics as primary forms of identification for individuals?
For example, when you go into airport, they're not going to use passports anymore.
They're going to use eye scan or a DNA sample or anything like that.
Well, for DNA, you'd have to have pretty rapid scanning, right?
And there is a technology is also progressing, right?
So we may get to a point where we might be able to do it on the spot.
Yes. And people, manufacturers do develop equipment for rapid DNA scans and it's getting faster.
It's still not at the point where it would be as fast as a retinal scan or a fingerprint.
But do you think there's a possibility that move towards the place in the future where
we don't need to use ID or passport or anything like that?
Our biology, our face facial recognition, our DNA would be our identification factors.
It's already working that way on my new iPhone.
It recognizes my thumb and it activates my credit card.
I guess if somebody stole that and could replicate my fingerprint,
they could buy a new car with it.
But we have some faith that this sort of biometric works even in our everyday life.
So what is happening to the future of data gathering and security?
Because this is getting within inside people's body, right?
People are concerned now that their phone calls are being monitored
or companies can track what they're searching on internet.
How would they feel when, you know, it's their biology, it's their genetics?
I don't know.
It's nothing that we're involved in.
But as you say, there's facial recognition software, there's all sorts of new biometrics.
With DNA, if someone had the resources, you see this at crime scenes.
Suppose a perpetrator leaves someone's house
and then you have video recordings.
This is from a case I was involved in in Pittsburgh earlier this year.
This video recordings of the person walking down the street,
possibly having left this crime scene and shedding clothing,
going to an ATM to get money out and getting into a car.
So there's a history that's left not just in these videos and transactions,
but in the biological materials that from what the person touched,
from the clothing that they wore, from whatever was left as they left the crime scene.
So when you're working on a crime,
obviously you'd want to have all that information
and put it together and figure out who the person was.
But I think what you're discussing is the potential
of imagine that we're five or 10 years in the future.
Speed has increased, costs have gone down.
Is there the potential to check a lot more material
without even having some probable cause to do so?
I would hope that our constitutions and our laws would protect us from that.
But technologically, it would be feasible.
Right. And do you think that that's kind of a no-brainer for general public
to start to educate themselves more about the advancement of technology?
Because most of the people that I'm speaking to,
a lot of these advancement and progress, it's just surprising to them.
They can't believe how far we've come
and they can't believe all the possibilities that are available ahead of us.
And I think it freaks a lot of people out every possibility that exists already
and will continue to exist to interfere in their personal life.
A lot of it for the main purpose of security,
but a lot of people will raise the question of what is happening to privacy?
Well, I think we're all concerned about privacy.
I think when people hear about what technology does for good,
for example, advances in DNA technology that can diagnose disease,
or maybe now with newer CRISPR technology,
the name of the technology is CRISPR technology, possibly cure diseases.
So with the case of forensics, the ability to solve crimes
that could not have been solved before to achieve justice and resolution for victims.
On the positive side, I think people can envision all that.
But the darker side is what happens when these technologies may be used
in ways that people haven't thought of.
For example, with the CRISPR technology,
it's one thing to use genetics to try to cure disease,
it's another thing to change the genetics of our species.
How do you feel about that, changing the genetics of our species?
Well, I'll tell you, it makes no biological sense.
Here's what would happen.
You've seen Gattaca?
Yes.
OK, so in a world like Gattaca, what would happen is that you'd get a narrowing of diversity.
You would have parents or governments or somebody making decisions
to weed out what might be considered bad, in quotes, bad genes and reinforce good genes,
move towards almost a clone-like population.
And that might be seen as good.
But biology and nature doesn't really view that as good.
And when you end up with a few catastrophes, like influenza viruses or other attacks,
that lack of diversity would wipe out our species.
So what seems like a really good idea in the short term,
in the long term, really wouldn't work for a species,
because if we all become too uniform, we lose the diversity
that enables the survival of a species.
What if that decision is made, let's say, by an artificial intelligence based on enormous amount
of data that is impossible for humans to process?
It has to be processed by machine using machine learning or whatever techniques that is going to
arise, and they just, you know, artificial intelligence more and more getting involved
directly in our lives, and they just decide that this would be the better path for humanity.
And we're so dependent on them at some point that we just have to deal with it.
Well, as I said, when technology is used for good, that can be fine.
For example, our Trulio technology is a type of machine learning that mines information out of data.
And when it's used for good, for resolving crime, that's wonderful.
But if you were to rely on computers to decide to make a boneheaded decision for our species,
maybe that would mean the computers are a bit smarter than we'd want them to be,
and they're plotting our extinction.
Certainly, winnowing diversity out of our population through genetics is a very bad idea.
We don't know what genes really do.
We don't know what the evolutionary adaptations can be for any feature that humans have.
But what we do know is that evolution relies on that diversity, that genetic diversity,
in order to maintain survival of a species.
Would it be fair to say that you have concerns about the rise of artificial intelligence,
like Bill Gates or Elon Musk and Stephen Hawking's?
No, I don't think I have a concern about artificial intelligence.
I would have a concern about misuse of artificial intelligence.
The same way I don't have concerns about cars,
but I do have concerns about people running people over with cars.
It's a tool, and unfortunately, as we see in society, some people abuse tools.
So I guess my question is this, where do you see DNA research going in terms of forensics,
and what's next?
Are you looking to expand, or are you looking to look into other areas of research
to exonerate more people, or how do you hear about these cases?
People tend to contact us, and we're not the only ones who contact us.
People tend to contact us, whether they're police, prosecutors, defenders, or innocence projects,
when the methods that their labs are using don't go far enough.
The labs tend to be pretty conservative.
They tend to like methods that confirm what they can see by eye.
This isn't all labs, but it's many crime labs.
Whereas, the information that's contained in data is often beyond what you can see by eye.
I mean, there are so many examples in medicine to see what we can see in a magnetic resonance image,
which I did research on that about 30 years ago.
We rely on MRI scans, and we have magnets and radio waves that can take cross-sectional
of our brains and bodies, and use them in very subtle ways for diagnosis.
If you didn't accept that we could make very good use of data and reconstruct it by machines or
computer intelligence, then you wouldn't have the benefits of probably most medical technology nowadays.
So, we tend to get involved when someone in law enforcement or law needs more information from data.
The nice thing about Tru-Allele is that it's completely objective.
There's been a lot of research and talk about subjectivity and potential bias
when you have complex DNA samples, particularly mixtures.
Those are real concerns that can be confirmation bias or other sorts of bias that human analysts
have. The most common bias is to say nothing and just give no answer at all.
But with Tru-Allele, nobody chooses the data for it.
All the data goes into the machine, and the machine doesn't see the answer.
It doesn't know who you're going to be comparing it with, what their genetic types are like,
the results can be compared against one person, ten, or a database of a million people.
So, objective technology like that is pretty good.
We tend to get called when crime labs have reached their limit of what they're willing to do or what
they're able to do. And then usually through word of mouth or internet, somebody finds out about us
and asks if we can help.
So, I'm assuming it's only the most serious cases that you would be asked to come in on?
We tend to only get involved in serious case. I mean, the most serious case we ever did in some
sense was the World Trade Center disaster, when we were asked by the medical examiner's office in New
York City over 10 years ago to re-examine all the DNA data from the over 18,000 victim remains.
And the DNA that was collected from relatives and personal effects from the 2,700 missing people,
analyzed everything in Trulio, and then make automatic comparisons to identify the victim remains.
How long does that take to identify that many people?
Well, it was a project. We scaled up, we built a supercomputer for it.
It was the first of that type with our current Trulio architecture can work on 50 or 100 problems
simultaneously. And we first built a machine for that when we started on that re-analysis task
10 years ago. So, I'd say maybe it took, the whole effort probably took at least a year
of entering the data, asking the computer the questions. For the computer to answer the
questions, solve the DNA questions, make the comparisons, and get the numbers,
that wasn't as much work as its computer. But just getting the data, it ended up being about
100,000 samples of data that had to be entered into the system in a reliable way.
And this is something that would have been impossible without the use of the machines, correct?
Certainly, in the way that we did it. You can have a huge effort and do a lot of things manually,
but you won't get as much information. You are correct that we tend to only work on
more high-profile cases, or cases where it's important to get a resolution.
We can think of any number of examples. You have a serial rapist who's terrorizing a town.
There's a lot of DNA. The crime lab can't interpret it, but once it's gone through the
truly ill process, and the evidence can be compared against evidence, it can be compared
with databases. There are issues with databases due to government's reluctance to use newer
technologies. We haven't seen that in Canada. By being able to have computers resolve the evidence
and separate out the mixtures and make comparisons, determine what items are not matching people,
or what items are not matching items, we can really map out a crime scene and get a sense
of what's been happening and who are the different players.
Mark, as someone who's dealing with genetics, basically the basis of humanity,
do you see ethics and morality as objective or subjective?
That's an interesting question. I think everybody has their own morality, and I know there are
different systems of ethics. Once you would have more than one system of ethics, if people can
adopt which ones they want to choose, you now have some subjectivity.
We have this conversation in many episodes, and my main follow-up question would be,
then how do you think it will translate into the media?
One of the provincial methods that some people are talking about of controlling artificial
intelligence is applying our own ethics and morality into the machine, so they know what
killing is bad. If you're driving in a road and three people are there and one child is there,
which direction should you go to? What are your thoughts about that?
I think you'd be at the mercy of the programmers.
In the sense that there are many possible answers. Sometimes what people would decide
would be an ethically correct decision may depend on information that you're not giving
a program, or it doesn't have access to.
I mean, you have all these hypotheticals, right? Is it okay to ever take a human life?
Well, then you get the, but what if you had a time machine and you could kill Hitler?
We obviously are taking away many human lives on a daily basis using technology to do it easier and safer.
Yes, and then there are ethical issues of should we be using technology to prevent that sort of wholesale killing?
I mean, one of the ethical issues that we've seen in the Middle East with Syria is,
which you read about all the time, is what should have been the ethical obligation on the part of
various, you know, different ways in which we could have done that?
The ethical obligation on the part of various large powers to somehow intervene in the wholesale slaughter there.
That was a place where technology might have helped, and yet it was humans who made decisions not to help
and not to deploy that technology. You could call it natural intelligence or natural stupidity,
as opposed to artificial intelligence. But people make decisions all the time
that can affect thousands or hundreds of thousands of lives.
A lot of the job of interpretation is being done by machine, if I understand it correctly,
and a lot of job of data gathering is being done by humans.
Do you think that also data gathering needs more technology and more machines involved
instead of humans to maybe minimize the mistakes and faults?
We don't see too many mistakes in the data gathering with DNA evidence.
One of the reasons it's really not much of a problem, particularly with true allele interpretation,
is suppose that there's a possible fault that would be that the police officer or the analyst,
DNA analyst, collecting the sample contaminates the DNA.
So instead of there being the original two people, say the victim and the perpetrator,
who'd left their DNA on an item, now you have a third person.
Well, if the lab is using interpretation methods where they can't do anything about that contaminant,
about the person who left their DNA by accident, who is collecting the sample,
then that's a mistake. On the other hand, if you use technology like true allele,
that says, okay, well, there's one more contributor in there, just to count for them
and factor out that extra contribution so we can focus on what was actually happening at the crime,
then what might have been a mistake using better technology that can separate out components from
data is no longer a mistake. So we don't really see mistakes of that kind. We may see more complex data,
but then we just aim the computer at it and it solves it as best it can.
You guys just had an election down there. And one of the main issues, if not the main issue,
was jobs. And one of the arguments against what Trump proposes is that a lot of those jobs are
not going to come back because they will be automated. What are your thoughts about how
technology is replacing jobs? I don't know if it's happening as much in your field as well,
but in many other fields, it's a big threat to a lot of people. What are your thoughts on that
automation and the future of job and how is it going to affect our society?
Well, I've heard different people talking about this. There are some people who are looking
forward to the day in the near future where artificial intelligence and machines have
eliminated the need for work entirely. I certainly don't see that in my weekly existence. I can
easily go up to 100 hours in a week if there's too much to do. So despite all the computers that we
have, there seems to be more work. I think it's a combination of education and technology.
From what I've seen in the history of science and in my own work, if you bring in more technology,
if you have education that goes along with it, you're going to create more jobs. A great example
of that is when we moved from horses to cars. At the time, blacksmiths were terribly opposed to the
job loss that would result from removing horses as a form of transportation. On the other hand,
once the cars came along, re-educating blacksmiths or educating other people to become
designers, manufacturers, mechanics, just everything that's needed in that ecosystem
created a tremendous amount of work. Make the same argument for accounting or any field where
the computers have come in, not just machines. If you don't have retraining, if you don't have
education, and ideally education in the broadest sense, which isn't limited skills, but the ability
to learn and think, then you can have a problem. If you have a workforce that doesn't have the
opportunity to learn and grow and move with the technology, there could be a lot of displacement.
But if you do have rapid technological growth and you have governments that support and
support the education that needs to happen along with that, and a workforce that's willing to
relearn, I think historically you've seen an expansion in jobs as technology evolves.
I also want to talk about the way that the United States is dealing with genetics in
comparison to a country like China. China being apparently the biggest atheist country in the
world, they have no problem experimenting with many different experimentations. The method CRISP,
I think, the first experiments were done in China. They're saying the United States is going to be
next, but another subject is designer babies. They're apparently very open-minded about it
in China and Russia to experiment over it, but in the United States there are religious
maybe judgments and obstacles along the way. How do you feel about that?
Well, as I said before, the concept of Gattaca-style designer babies may seem like
a good thing in the short run, but it leads to a loss of diversity that is genetically bad for
a population, if not a species. But do you think United States in America, they have a kind of a
limitation in front of them because of religion that Chinese and Russians don't have? Because
they're going to do it anyways, whether bad or not, because it's kind of like a Cold War kind of
an era. It's a competition that they're using military and they're using technology to gain
the dominance of the leadership in the world. Do you think that United States is falling behind
because of the religious approach that they have in politics, especially?
I don't know. Here in the Northeast, we don't really see in Pennsylvania the effect of
religious prescription against these sorts of scientific adventures or misadventures.
There may be other types of regulations. The US can be pretty chaotic. Different communities,
states or counties or cities will embark on their own social experiments. We have a lot of diversity.
You may have less of that diversity in a more structured authoritarian country like in China
or in Russia. The same thing is true in Canada. Canadians are fairly laid back and what happens
in Toronto may be different from the cultural mores of Saskatchewan.
Excellent. I'm just going to ask you the last question that I'm asking all the guests. If you
come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you say as the worst thing
humanity has done and what would you say as humanity's greatest achievement?
You should have sent me this question to think about for a month ahead. I'm taking it very
seriously. Part of the point of the question is just to capture the reaction of the people
hearing it for the first time too. I think the worst thing that humanity has done is
depriving human beings as people of opportunities to become what they can. The most severe example
that would be genocide, murder and war, but that can happen in other forms of repression, poverty
and so on. I think in the ways in which society makes us either not exist or become less human,
that's a terrible thing. To the extent that society can help people become more, do more
and contribute more, that's a great thing. I think my answer to that would be a human answer
as opposed to any other technology answer. To the extent that society can help humans become more
human and people and having greater interrelationships, that's great. The degree to
which people and their potentials are repressed, that's terrible.
Thank you.
