You know, in the same mindset that it takes to believe that we need to make America great
again, or we need to bring back these old policies because they have some sort of value
that we've lost by changing, you know, by progressing our policies, that there's also
this kind of nostalgia for a time where people, frankly, had less information, they knew less,
they were less educated, and that's easier to manipulate and easier to control.
Hello and welcome to the 38th episode of Neo Human Podcasts.
I'm Aga Bahari at Agologist on Twitter and Instagram, and you can follow the show on
LiveInLimbo.com, iTunes and YouTube.
With me today, I have Ismail Ali.
Welcome to the show, Ismail.
Hi Aga.
It's great to talk to you.
Thank you for the invitation.
I much appreciate it.
My absolute pleasure.
Why don't we start by hearing a little about your background, the work you've done, and
what are you focusing on mainly now these days?
Sure.
Well, it's kind of hard to talk about the work that I do now without giving a little
bit of kind of personal background.
I'm the child of two immigrants.
I was born and raised in California, but my father came from Pakistan and my mother came
from Colombia in the 1980s.
They both kind of left their respective countries as a result of either economic or political
pressures.
They both left their countries to the United States to avoid and to kind of ensure that
their children, myself and my brothers, could avoid some of the political and economic conflict
that they were experiencing in their home countries.
The reason I bring that up is because so much of my own experience and so much of my own
kind of political and personal professional route has been influenced by my own context
and my own political context and my own awareness of how very real kind of political, economic,
and other structural oppressions affect people like my family and myself and my community,
but also the people around me and my friends and my allies and the people that I've seen
in the world.
So that just general framework really had me very aware of and interested in very complex
political dynamics, especially around foreign policy and how the United States dealt with
both foreign and domestic policy in the post 9-11 era.
I was 11 years old when 9-11 happened and a lot of the response of the US government
after 9-11 to Muslim communities in the United States, but also to people around the world,
significantly influenced my own political leanings and I really saw or I felt like I
saw very clearly the result of how different forms of oppression articulated themselves
in different parts of the world and that led me really early to be really interested in
issues of multiculturalism and kind of religious dialogue and intercultural dialogue, not only
because I myself represented a combination of a variety of cultures, but also because
I realized that there was so much of the suffering that I saw was a result of not just miscommunication
but really this deep perception of misalignment between values that I think may not actually
exist and are rather there because of these historical and long-term oppressions and structures
that are built to maintain those structures, maintain those oppressive structures.
So I've been really critical of kind of the status quo, the political status quo for many,
many years.
I was marching against the war in Iraq in 2002, even before it started when I was a
really small child and spent most of my teenage years really critically kind of engaging with
issues of foreign policy and domestic policy, which then led me really directly to very
seriously critically engage with issues of mass incarceration and criminality in the
United States.
Over the course of my undergraduate and then my law school career, I focused a lot on civil
liberties and civil rights and how they were protected or restricted by not only US but
other governments and eventually kind of that brought me to a really acute awareness of
the war on drugs and how the war on drugs has been this mechanism and this tool of not
only criminal but also social control throughout the last few decades with the epicenter of
that process being the United States.
So that led me to work at the American Civil Liberties Union where I did some criminal
justice reform work and I did some other policy work in 2015.
In the year after that, I spent a lot of time researching human rights and really brought
this general feeling of discomfort around the way governments treated their citizens
to a more kind of theoretical place where I was really trying to connect the oppressions
that I was seeing with and hopefully the solutions for those oppressions I was seeing to these
larger concepts which I later discovered were really well articulated in the international
scheme for human rights and that all led me to really thinking critically about access
to healing and the role of healing in change over time and changing these structures and
that kind of dovetailed really directly and really easily into what became the work that
I do now which is essentially political and policy advocacy work for the Multidisciplinary
Association for Psychedelic Studies which it was formed as a research organization to
kind of bring MDMA in particular out of the illegal criminal context that it was placed
in in the mid-80s into a legal medical framework and I'm now seeing this shift from focusing
primarily and only on research as a method of change in education into a greater expansion
into connecting these issues of access to healing, of access to medicine, to not only
issues that challenge the framework of the drug war but also really align it with these
bigger values that I've been thinking about for so long like human rights and social justice.
That's amazing. You obviously have had some experiences with psychedelics yourself, right?
Yes, I have.
Yeah, and so have I. I'll give you a little bit of background about myself. I came from
Iran as a refugee and I was in love with America all my life. That was the goal to make it
to America because everything that was good was coming from America and all the pressure
and all the difficulties and all the complexity that I had to deal with as a child and growing
up in that environment. I tried to seek help in different ways from talking to psychologists
and gurus and mentors and life coaches and stuff and then I ended up trying psilocybin
mushrooms in Vancouver, BC and that was life-changing experience for me because for me it brought
out everything that I had in my mind and articulated in a very emotional way that I'm sure you
know what I'm talking about but it's kind of difficult to describe it to people who
haven't tried it and it really was life-changing for the best. I stayed with it not like doing
it all the time but with psychedelics you cannot do it all the time. You take two, three
grams of mushrooms and the lessons that you've learned you have to process for the next week
or two but what's interesting to me about you is that do you find any political organizations
in today's America that you can affiliate with because I don't hear that much of a pro
drug overall, a pro psychedelic narration from either of the parties.
So I want to comment on a couple of things you said before answering that question because
you just brought up a lot of really, really interesting concepts and I just pulled up
a study that the Guardian just reported on. This study came out really recently, we had
last Wednesday that found that mushrooms are actually the safest recreational drug and
they just did a really big study where they looked at who sought medical treatment after
using a variety of different drugs like MDMA, LSD, cocaine, cannabis. They found that one
of the riskiest drugs was synthetic cannabis which is really interesting because synthetic
cannabis is primarily used by people who are getting drug test and who can't use real cannabis
so it's primarily a function of the prohibition of cannabis that synthetic cannabis is even
a thing and second they found that people who took mushrooms, I mean this is all the
study occurred over the course of 2016 but they said that out of 12,000 people who were
reported taking psilocybin mushrooms, 0.2% needed emergency medical treatment which is
five times lower than that of MDMA, LSD, and cocaine. It's just funny that you say that
specifically because there's now increasing evidence that magic mushrooms, in particular
psilocybin in particular, is one of the safest drugs in the world and the unfortunate reality
is that most people who have bad experiences is people who pick their own mushrooms and
eat the wrong mushrooms that are toxic rather than psychedelic. It's interesting that you
bring up your experience with psilocybin because I too had an experience with psilocybin when
I was young that really significantly changed my own perception around my own political
kind of state and my own understanding of my role in the world that I think has had
a tremendous impact on the work that I've been doing. I just wanted to comment on that
before going on because it's an interesting parallel and something I very much resonate
with and I think a lot of other people resonate with too. Even though I hear what you mean
that talking about it to people who have an experience can be challenging, it's also true
that for many people who have, whether they're in the West or not, the kind of enduring universality
of the experience is something that a lot of people share.
Going to your question around political affiliations, it's interesting that you ask that because
first and foremost, there haven't been that many organizations, well there really are
very few organizations that are actively open about being, as you say, pro-drug users and
supporting specific use of specific substances. It's actually kind of funny, the first time
that I had a conversation with the Drug Policy Alliance a few years ago, they're now one
of our big allies at MAPS. We work a lot with the Drug Policy Alliance and we support their
work a lot. They focus a lot on harm reduction, they've done a lot of work on mass incarceration
and cannabis laws, but one of the first questions I had for them was, I wonder what is it that's
preventing you from being pro-drug use, being open to not only minimizing the harms but
also recognizing some of the benefits?
The response, which I think was very reasonable, is that at this point in time, this was a
few years ago, not only was there not necessarily enough evidence to say, well, anyone should
be coming out in favor of drug use, whatever that means, but also that we hadn't yet fully
explored the nuances of what we meant by drug use, whether it's in psychedelic or other
contexts. So much of the conversation generally, and this is true also in political spaces
with respect to people who are responding to the war on drugs, is based on what people
perceive as much more urgent needs, so dealing with harm reduction from injection drug users
and ensuring that people who take substances are taking them in settings that are safe
and that have the auxiliary support necessary for people who have challenging experiences,
whether it's with a psychedelic or another substance. So we at MAPS are really cautious
because although our work has really focused primarily on research and because we've published
quite a bit of really impressive research, especially with respect to the studies that
we've conducted ourselves about MDMA for PTSD, it's also true that we've sponsored
and worked with other organizations to study other things like Ibogaine and like Ayahuasca,
both of which have a very different profile of use, a different cultural context, a different
kind of framework of use that almost places them, that some people believe places them
in a different category than something like MDMA or even LSD or heroin or cocaine. So
to kind of loop back around and really answer your question, one of the things that we're
trying to do at MAPS and that I personally have really been spending a lot of time and
effort to work in, along with my colleague and supervisor, Natalie Ginsburg, who's the
Policy and Advocacy Manager at MAPS, is really kind of figuring out what that space looks
like. What does it really mean to advocate for this, not just for more research, but
also for access to these substances? MAPS' goal is to create legal, safe and legal context
for the medical, cultural, and therapeutic use of these substances. And in order to have
those structures, we need to have a clear understanding of our identity, both as advocates
and as people within the movement of access to the substances. Just to finish this thought,
I think one of the biggest mistakes that people made in the 1960s was, you know, really increase
discussions around access to the substances, but did not bring with it the structures within
which those substances could be safely done. Education. Exactly. And also, I think one
big piece of it is also, one great example is that a number of indigenous cultures, including
ones who've used ayahuasca and iboga and a number of other substances, have been using
psychedelic substances for years and years and years in a variety of contexts with little
to no negative consequences. And that's partially because they have these systems in place,
not just education, but also these like really large, complex social systems that allow
people to be both educated and then well supported in the process of taking the substance and
afterward. And that just didn't exist in the 1960s. We kind of got access to LSD and
mushrooms and then imploded. You know, there really wasn't that structure that needed
to happen. And that's what we're trying to do now is create that structure. Education
in the broader sense is what I mean that, because to me, it seems like all the conclusions
that are needed in order to policies being built upon them are non-existent now because
we can't even have a conversation without being completely rejected. You know, you can't
talk about ayahuasca and LSD and mushrooms and not being compared to cocaine and meth
and crack and you know, it's just a very alienated subject that majority of people, even if they
don't want to deal with it themselves, they automatically and by default, they're defensive
towards it. Absolutely. Absolutely. And you know, even you know, as drug policy advocates,
because although you know, I and my colleagues work with psychedelics primarily, we're also
you know, at the end of the day, we're also drug policy and criminal justice reform advocates
because the issue is not only just the structure, but it's also the fact that the current scheme
criminalizes the behavior, which makes any sort of safe structured use that much more
difficult. So we're very cautious to avoid throwing other drugs under the bus because
we really do believe in compassionate responses to people who use any substance, you know,
whether it's heroin, whether it's meth, whether it's mushrooms, but also recognizing that
there, there, there has been this kind of like unfortunate kind of blanket stigma attached
to any sort of mind altering substance, which is simply put like kind of an uneducated and
unevident response that isn't based in evidence, excuse me, that's what I'm trying to say,
but it's based much more on those initial miseducation or fear based responses that
were really promoted by a variety of past past administrations, presidents, governments,
whatever that has kind of set into the public conversation that like exactly as you said,
if we're going to be talking about these substances, we have to be talking to them in the context
of the harms and the toxins and the bad things that they do, which kind of goes back to your
early question, it's like, well, we're now getting, you know, this is the big change
that's happening right now in the midst of what people are calling this psychedelic renaissance,
which is that, well, we now are getting clinical evidence of, of, of facts that people have
have speculated about and suspected for years and years and years, you know, people in the
West have been speculating for decades now and for, for indigenous communities, you've
been working with some of these substances for literally centuries, if not longer. And
we're finally starting to get to a point where talking about these structures, these regulatory
structures is simply put no longer, you know, theoretical pie in the sky woo woo nonsense,
because we really need to start thinking seriously about, you know, if, if we, if maps will have
gone through the FDA approval process, you know, there's a simultaneous, the same simultaneous
process for psilocybin research in the United States. It's also going through the FDA approval
process. If in five years, we have legal prescription access to either both of these substances
in specific cases for specific people, we need to know how to do it. We can't pretend
like we, we already have this, the solutions or the structures because we don't. And we
also can't pretend that, you know, any conversation about them isn't relevant because they are.
We're now at a point where we really need to be seriously thinking about like, well,
what, you know, who's funding it, who's getting access to it, how is insurance dealing with
these are questions that are very relevant for other issues of, you know, of kind of
medical treatments that just aren't at all live yet in the world of psychedelics, just
because we're still kind of working to get taken seriously by the rest of, by the rest
of, uh, by the rest of the people who haven't caught on yet. I'll say that we're definitely
getting taken seriously and rightfully so by a number of people because the evidence
is just coming out and it's just so good. But, you know, there's still a lot of that,
that stigma to, to, to counteract. That's very true. Um, what is the current state of
war on drugs? Because we were getting very close to have a general conversation about
legalization of marijuana all across the U S and here in Canada. And then Trump administration
happened and Jeff session and all of that. So how, how are we doing now? That's a really
good question. And it's, you know, I, I'm going to give an answer, but I can tell you
that I have yet to hear anything very secure. And that's not because people, anyone knows
more or less than the other, but because there's so much chaos occurring in the current administration
in the United States that it's kind of unclear how the power dynamics will shake out. And
as a result, you know, just practically speaking, we at maps are being very, you know, we're
treading pretty cautiously because what we want to make sure that we have some clarity
with respect to how the federal government will be dealing with, you know, moving forward
on the war on drugs before we start making any big moves. I will say that from our perspective
at maps, the, the research that we're doing is still going to go forward. The studies
that we're working on will still continue. We, we're not planning on making any dramatic
changes to the work that we do based on this, on this shift in part because we work so closely
with the FDA and because the FDA has been so supportive and accommodating of the process
of this research because, you know, they, they're at least, you know, in, to the extent
of, to the extent of the amount that they've worked with us, really interested in figuring
out the truth behind the legitimacy of these substances. And the only way you can do that
is with, you know, rigorous scientific evaluation, which is exactly what we're doing. But more
generally on the question of the war on drugs, I have to say that there, there's kind of
mixed feelings in the drug policy community about, there's a solid percentage of people,
myself included, that are, I think, rightfully skeptical because people like Jeff Sessions
and others who are kind of coming, it's kind of like a blast from the past. You know, a
lot of people are really seeing it as this attempt of the crit administration to go back
to fifties fifties, if that right. Like I've been, you know, you look at some of the rhetoric
and it's not, it's not so far off of the rhetoric that you hear, that you heard in like even
like the thirties when they were first attempting to criminalize cannabis. And generally speaking
going backwards is not a good idea, but going back to those particular areas, I think is
the, is particularly dangerous because that's where, you know, that, that was the origin
of a lot of the rhetoric and a lot of the behavior that we now see articulated in these
extremely high rates of incarceration for, for black and brown Americans and for poor
people all over the United States and in other places. So, um, I, I'm, I'm a perma optimist.
I always, I'm trying to look at the bright side and I have to say that as, as scary as
it is, and as much as, as much as it's true that a number of people will be very rapidly
and dramatically negatively affected by this attempt to return to these kind of like old
outdated beliefs that, you know, incarcerating more people and finding and doing more kind
of increasing criminality is a good thing, which, which I think so much research and
so much of our experience has proven otherwise. Um, I do believe that what's happening right
now in the United States, especially, but this is true around the world, it's kind of
this, um, unearthing of this shadow that, that has kind of been lurking in American
culture for a really long time. You know, the thing about the Korean administration
is that we're not really seeing, especially for those of us who've spent many years, myself
and we've spent many years being really critical of the American political establishment, you
know, what we're seeing is not exactly a surprise, you know, where I'm not, you know, a lot of
us are not necessarily surprised that, you know, people can be this bad or can be this
kind of reactionary. It's mostly scary to see the kind of public support that's coming
out in favor of it. And I think that that process, and again, this is the optimist in
me, maybe it's night and maybe being night, but I do think it's just optimism that what
we kind of need to go through this process of seeing how bad things really are before
we can properly deal with probably deal with solutions. And ironically, that makes it kind
of like a psychedelic experience where, you know, you got to deal with some of the bad,
like the bad, traumatic, intense, challenging things before you can get to healing. And
I think what's happening right now with both the war on drugs and just generally in the
United States is this process of really unearthing all of that trauma that people have tried
and failed to, you know, keep in the ground. And I think that this is really how we can
really understand what are the real problems and what are the solutions? How do we actually
deal with it?
Yeah, well, it's clearly a subject interesting to large group of people. And it's not like
war on drugs or tougher policies are going to stop them. All it had done is just empowered
people in the black market, whether in this reality or internet and darknet to, you know,
buy anything they want with Bitcoin. I know people who have done that. It's not it's not
a very hard thing to do. You can do it really easily. But what you're saying is very true.
We don't really know the risks and we don't really know the full potential that we can
get from these drugs to help each other and help the world. Because the connectivity of
it is is is an interesting aspect to that how internet is connecting us with each other,
the sense of how we're connected to everything else when we're doing psychedelics. It seems
to be something that politicians are trying to avoid to face, right? So do you think ideologically,
they also have something against it that, hey, if you do mushrooms and LSD, you realize
that Jeff Sessions or Trump or Clinton or none of those people are really addressing
the real issues that you have to deal with on a personal level?
Absolutely. So it's it's funny that you mentioned the internet because I think that what I think
I'm calling the internetification of the world, which is just this interesting kind of like
rapid connectivity, which, as you say, is like a total game changer for society. I think
that we can I think that you can kind of see some sort of analogy between the fight for
net neutrality and access information like free accessible information that that parallels
what we're seeing with access to other kinds of knowledge technologies, including psychedelics.
I think that, you know, I try not to be a cynic, but at the at the at the end of the
day, when I see, you know, repeated attempts by politicians and others to restrict access
to information, which is really like the one of the most unifying things about being about
a human society, which is this increase in access to education and access to information,
which is such a crucial piece of liberation, both in a physical and physical, literal and
a mental kind of paradigm. The I can't help but wonder what, as you say, like what what
are the what is motivating these people to be so reactionary and frightened about it?
I think that we can get some of that information by looking at how exactly, you know, drug
control systems, especially like control systems for psychedelics, were kind of originated
in the late 60s and early 70s as a response to not only this really, really vibrant youth
led antiwar movement, but also this dramatic societal shift that was kind of this backlash
from what people saw as this idyllic American dream that was kind of created in the 1950s.
And I believe that, you know, that in the same, you know, in the same mindset that it
takes to believe that we need to make America great again, or we need to bring back these
old policies because they have some sort of value that we've lost by changing, you know,
by progressing our policies, that there's also this kind of nostalgia for a time where
people frankly had less information, they knew less, they were less educated, and that's
easier to manipulate and easier to control. I don't necessarily believe that the current,
the current, you know, continuation of criminality around psychedelics in particular is directly
related to this giant malicious structure that wants to keep people kind of keep people
in their own kind of spaces, intellectual spaces. But I do believe that there is a fear
that having access to these altered mind states could result in, you know, exactly the thing
that people were afraid of, which people saw having in the 1960s, which is anti authoritarianism
or behavior that's seen as being misaligned with the social order. I think the big mistake
there is that, A, well, there's two, I think there's two big mistakes with that. The first
being assuming that the current social order works for everyone, which is simply not the
case. It marginalizes and leaves behind full populations of people, Black Americans, Americans
of color, people of color around the world, people in countries that are currently being
directly targeted by the American Warfare Machine, people in the Global South who are
victims of the exploitation of the North and of the West. You know, there's all these populations
that are being left behind by the status quo. So that premise that the status quo works
and should be promoted right there from the beginning is flawed. And then on top of that,
the impression is that there isn't any value that can come out of this use. And I'm not
just talking about medically and therapeutically, but I mean from a broader interpersonal and
social perspective, which I think is another big mistake. I think that part of what's coming
out of this movement toward access to psychedelics, whether it's for medicine or for sacrament
or for personal development, kind of goes back to what you were saying earlier around
what exactly are the benefits here? And I think part of those benefits include a willingness
to recognize that restructuring certain aspects of society would not just be better for these
marginalized populations that I mentioned, but also just better for everybody because
we've tried systems that have clearly failed to work and that maybe finding alternatives,
whether it's with the help of personal development or personal work through use of psychedelics
or sacred medicine or whatever else or some other method. I'm not claiming that taking
mushrooms is like the way we're going to create the new society, but I do believe that there
is ought to be said for the kind of mind state that psychedelics can promote and how that
creative open space can be really, really positive, can result in positive outcomes
for this longer term development and creation of not just alternative, but more articulated,
more honest and more free societies.
Absolutely. And I just want to add to that a part of your introduction, a MAPS website
that says that you believe that psychedelic consciousness is crucial piece of challenging
oppression in all of its form and the legal access to psychedelics is an essential part
of a progressive drug policy paradigm.
Absolutely. Yeah.
So it's very important. And what's interesting to me is that a lot of the negative narrative
is coming from the religious side. And yet Jesus himself was one of the most famous activists
against the status quo. And at the same time, the religious experiences that certain people
have on psychedelics, there are a lot of studies that shows maybe Moses, for example, had a
psychedelic experience as well.
Absolutely. I think it's very interesting that a lot of the people who are a lot of
the characters that have been kind of touted as being spiritual leaders, the Prophet Muhammad
in Islam, Jesus, Buddha, a lot of these characters are pretty psychedelic figures in the sense
that if you read about their lives and what they've done, they have this, one of the most
universal characteristics of really very influential religious leaders is this deep generosity
and this deep willingness to be open to compassion to others, in particular people who are suffering.
And I know plenty of people who I know, I know plenty of people who've taken psychedelics
and who haven't necessarily developed that. So I don't want to, you know, again, act like
these are silver bullets.
That said, there is no doubt in my mind that for many, many people, myself included, maybe
for you, for a lot of others, access to psychedelic spaces, and this is kind of what the comment
in my bio is about, access to that kind of psychedelic state of mind and psychedelic
really just being a proxy here for an open and articulated frame, open, creative and
articulated frame of mind. It is one of the most enduring characteristics of what people
see as deeply mystical, if not deeply mystical and often spiritual beliefs, which lead to
religious structures. The commentary that you're making is really interesting. So I
was actually, I was raised Muslim. My mother was Catholic. My father was Muslim. My mother
converted to Islam later in my life and I was raised Muslim. I still identify as Muslim
and I've been thinking a lot about the intersection between the mystical experience, both in Sufi
Islam and also in other faiths and in the psychedelic experience and in how there is
so much that I think that modern religious structure can learn from the freedom and the
openness of the psychedelic experience. And frankly, although I'm personally very critical
of a lot of the way that institutionalized religion has been articulated, especially
politically in the world today, I do believe that the psychedelic world can learn a lot
from how indigenous structure, indigenous cultures and other long-standing religious
and spiritual traditions have held that space and have created containers where not only
the experiences can be had, but also that the maximum benefit of something like mysticism
or the mystical experiences that come out of psychedelic experiences can be best articulated
not only in the individual who takes it, but also in their personal relationships and in
a larger sense in society. One of the most amazing gifts I think that indigenous sacred
plant medicine use has that I think that the West and the general psychedelic culture could
learn a lot from is the use of rites of passage and initiations. I think that we as people
who are experimenting with our minds in a variety of contexts, whether we identify as
psychonauts or whatever else, are kind of seeking out that initiation, seeking out those
mystical experiences, or else we wouldn't be called to eat like a random mushroom that
we heard. There's this kind of like deep courage and curiosity in people who seek access to
psychedelic spaces because they kind of have, whether it's conscious or not, they have
found and we have found this alignment between this deep spiritual seeking and this state
that some of these substances are able to promote. And I think that that's where kind
of getting to your point around where the opposition lies. I think that that can be
seen as a threat for traditional religious structures. And I recognize that direct access
to divinity or to mysticism can be threatening to structures that require mediums or require
some sort of buffer between divinity or God or great spirit or whatever.
Middle man.
Exactly. Exactly. Some sort of middle structure. I think that psychedelics really totally obliterate
that middle structure and show every person that they can have a direct connection to
whatever that larger power is, which is kind of scary for some people.
Yeah. I think the problem actually is shared between organized religions, certain organized
religions and nation states that they don't want to lose the exclusive access to knowledge
and information that they've held for hundreds of years.
Definitely.
Yeah. And I don't really know how it's going to conclude itself. I think people like you
are heroes. I think you're doing the greatest work that anybody can do because you guys
are not giving people fish. You're teaching people how to fish in the best possible way.
That is, take that medicine and learn about yourself and learn about your surrounding
and learn about your environment from your perspective because it really gets to, we
talk a lot about artificial intelligence on this show and how we're getting to the point
that we have to address core characteristics of what makes us human. Is it ethics and morality?
But not many of them are objective like laws of physics. These are our subjective perspective
dependent and psychedelic seems to be the best tool to discover that.
Yeah. Well, I first want to say, I really appreciate you saying that because I feel
very deeply honored to be doing this work.
I really do think so. It's not an easy thing to do and it's potentially dangerous work
to do.
Yeah. And I am looking forward to the day that, you know, it's not just a handful of
us that are like kind of putting ourselves on the front lines to do this because not
only is it like, just from a professional perspective, it's such an interesting space
to be in, to be on the cutting edge of these kind of kind of big social changes. But also
as you say, like, you know, we need a lot of input from a lot of people. There's a lot
of communities that have been left behind in the process of nation state building and
knowledge structuring and access to information that have been left out of the conversation.
And I think the only way that we're going to be able to create a society in the long
run that really truly is, you know, does avoid the repeated oppression that you and I have
been discussing over the course of this conversation and more is by exactly as you say, making
sure that people have the tools to get access to their own truth. So then they can bring
that truth, they can bring it forward into, you know, the greater conversation, which
is really about a co-creative space. It's about hearing what are the various needs of
all of the people that are affected by any given policy or any even structure and including
them in that conversation. And the only way I believe that they can be fully and truly
included is if, you know, these the people themselves have that awareness of their power
and of their access, which I think, as you say, like, is very, very, you know, I think
psychedelics are one of the most consistent and effective ways for that to happen. And
they're not the only way, but they work really well. And they work, you know, consistently
in a way that a lot of other modalities, whether it's meditation or whatever else, don't or
at least at least that takes so much longer to do. And frankly, we're we are in a time
of crisis, you know, all of the optimism that I've got still can't shield me from the fact
that we are living in a time of crisis, both with respect to climate change and with respect
to authoritarianism in the world, with respect to this really toxic relationship between
huge religious structures and nation states, wielding, wielding, you know, aggressive this
monopoly on violence, I think affects so many people around the world that, you know, if
the work that we do can even free the minds, free the minds of a few people at a time,
you know, one experience at a time, ideally in legal context, where it's safe, where they
don't have to worry about criminality, where they don't have to worry about negative effects,
where they have kind of auxiliary support structure that I think people really need
for responsible psychedelic use and for responsible substance use use, then we can see that, you
know, that pro drug position or at least that position that some substance use can be really
beneficial for some people is not so radical after all. I mean, we've got this serious
dedication to, you know, the pharmaceutical drug model. So it's not like it's unprecedented
that putting a substance in your body can be good for you. We're really just trying
to show that the substances that people have been so afraid of for so long fall into that
category also. Yeah, we're alcohol. And I should add, not only fall into that category,
but expand that category beyond our understanding. It's, it's really not just about having more
pharmaceuticals and having more, you know, structure within the medical context. It's
really about using the medical context as one vehicle for access through legal access,
which which can be in a variety of different kind of contexts, depending on depending on
the needs. And, you know, hopefully, hopefully down the line with a diversity of options
that that have been kind of sourced from the people themselves from the community themselves
of people that need it. Yeah, absolutely. I've always been very open about my positive
experiences with psychedelics. And when I say positive, not all of them were smooth
sailing, you know, I've had a lot of what people call bad trips, but even those I think,
you know, it's something that you it's something inside of you that you have to deal with.
And once you deal with it, that bad trip all of a sudden turns into one of one of the most
valuable experiences of your life. But I never advocated that, hey, you definitely have to
go and take it because it affects different people differently. But I think public education,
as is the case with technology, that any technology works as well as a society that adapts it.
This seems to be the same case that as more educated the society is better results and
better future. These kind of studies that are so fundamental to who we really are. Yeah,
will turn out to be in our societies. So yeah, I really do think you guys are doing a fantastic
job and a great job. And I wanted to ask you about the recent conference that you guys
also had with maps. If you can talk a little about that. Sure. Yeah. So we just had it
was in April 2017. So it was just about a month and a half ago. Now, we had our, I think,
third psychedelic science conference, which was the largest convening of psychedelic researchers
and kind of therapists and people who work in the psychedelic culture, of all time, to
the extent of our knowledge, there were almost 3000 people, I think we had about 2800 attendees
from almost 50 countries that were there for a variety of reasons, but really in particular
to get updated on not only the state of the science, so the state of the formal, legally
sanctioned investigations that are happening at research centers around the globe, but
also to get kind of clicked into where exactly the movement for legal access to psychedelics
actually is, which is a question of both the research and the culture and kind of the social
political conscious context, which we've kind of been discussing a bit in this conversation.
It was overall a humongous success. I think that there was over, you know, there are literally
over a hundred separate sessions, there were community forums and film screenings, and
of course lots and lots and lots of scientific presentations, and it was interesting because
it kind of represented this checkpoint or kind of like a watershed moment for the movement.
People have been talking now for a couple years about this renaissance that's occurring
in the world of psychedelics because after 30 or 40 years of totally dead space when
it came to research into psychedelics between the late 70s, early 80s and today, there's
been this major increase in funding and actual, like funding for investigations to investigations
themselves and to content and kind of like conclusions being drawn out of these investigations.
So for the first time in many, many years, we're getting this rapid increase in access
to information about exactly what psychedelics do and what context, and that amazing increase
in information has resulted in this really serious reconsideration of how the movement
generally talks about legal access. So I can just briefly share some of the big themes
that came up.
Sure, yeah, and this was not your first conference, right?
This was actually my first conference. I had not attended the one, and I should clarify,
the conferences are every four years, so they're not very frequent, and that's part of why
so many people showed up because there are quite a few psychedelic conferences around
the world that are happening all year and every year. In fact, just last fall, I attended
a psychedelic conference in Prague called Beyond Psychedelics. I attended one in New
York that happens every year called Horizons, and then I attended the second biannual IOWASCA,
World IOWASCA Conference, which was actually in Brazil and the Amazon. So there's a lot
of conferences happening, there's a lot of conversation happening, but psychedelic science
kind of stands in its own category, both because it's so big, it's literally thousands and
thousands of people, and also because MAPS has been in the game for so long because we,
as an organization, have been working in the space around psychedelic research and thus
policy for so long that we're seen as leaders in these conversations, which is why the really
big themes that came out over the course of the conference are not only relevant for us
at MAPS as we start to move forward in the process of beginning our Phase III MDMA research,
publishing more research that we've sponsored around Ibogaine and other substances, but
also for the movement more generally. So there are a few really, really big pieces, I think,
that are worth mentioning because you'll see them come up over and over in the conversation
around legal access to psychedelics and psychedelic research and therapy moving forward. One of
the first ones and one of the things that I think is really close to my heart is the
question of access. We kind of touched on this earlier, but there's this concern that
if and when, I'll say when, certain psychedelics become legally available for use for people
who have been diagnosed with certain disorders, whether it's PTSD or anxiety as a result
of the end of life, of their end of life or terminal illnesses or anxiety or addiction,
whatever it is, opioid use disorder, there's this very real question that I think has been
relevant in the general medical community around access and I think will be particularly
important in the conversation on psychedelics. So when I say access, I mean that especially
in places like the United States where we have a healthcare system that, as I mentioned
earlier, leaves a lot of people behind that costs a tremendous amount of money that is
not accessible to every population, which means that quality healthcare, especially
mental healthcare, is severely inaccessible to a number of populations in the United States
and outside. One great example is that when most people think about PTSD, post-traumatic
stress disorder, they're thinking about people who have returned from war, who've returned
from a violent conflict, or for people who have survived physical or sexual assault.
And I think rightfully so because those populations are very real examples of people who've experienced
who have PTSD. The unfortunate reality, though, is that there's also tremendous populations
in the United States and otherwise that experience PTSD that are dramatically underdiagnosed.
And unless there's some sort of change in the way that we deal with mental healthcare
and deal with diagnosis and access to treatment, then we can legalize all the psychedelics
we want, but those people will still not get access to treatment. So one example is that
they've done studies where teenagers in parts of Atlanta, in inner-city Atlanta, experience
as high comparable or higher rates of PTSD than people who come from war. And that's
purely as a result of trauma from racial discrimination over the course of their lives. Similarly,
trans people experience trauma from being discriminated against from the process of
misgendering in the way that society has yet to properly understand how to deal with populations
that are non-binary, people who are non-binary, who have kind of different than the status
quo gender identities. So there's huge populations of people who experience constant trauma,
constant discrimination on a daily or almost daily basis for their whole lives, and often
for many generations who aren't diagnosed with PTSD because they don't really fit that
paradigm. So when we're thinking about access to psychedelics, a lot of people, myself included,
believe that we need to be talking not only about the logistics, like how do we get insurance
to cover MDMA when that becomes real? How do we get cannabis to be something that's
openly available for people with PTSD via the Veterans Administration? These big questions.
But also, what about the many people that the current medical system is leaving behind?
How can we include them in the conversation? And that will be a really interesting edge
moving forward because the psychedelic community in the United States and in many other places
is pretty white and pretty privileged and pretty much kind of fits the demographics
of people who you expect to be able to work in a space that's much riskier, that requires
much more privilege to be in comfortably. People with less privilege, with less access
to resources are much less likely to be in spaces and to be working in spaces where they
have to literally put their lives or their livelihoods at risk to be doing that kind
of work.
That's a very good point. Yeah.
Yeah. And I think that it's the same with people who are doing all kinds of advocacy.
It's like the people who are putting themselves on the line are often people who feel comfortable
enough where they don't feel at risk by being criminalized, of being kind of harmed by the
system. So it's up to those of us with that privilege and with that space who have it
right now to include those voices in our conversation until they're ready to show up themselves.
And I'm not saying that people from communities of color, gender non-binary communities aren't
showing up because they certainly are. They absolutely are. And they're putting their
voices in this conversation also. But we've got a lot of work to do if we're going to
be talking about long-term access.
So we have a lot of work to do on a social level first.
Exactly. Exactly. And that's the thing. This issue is not necessarily an issue about psychedelic
period. It's about access to medicine and access to healthcare, which is much broader
than just our work. But I think that for the psychedelic movement to move forward with
integrity, we should be including that conversation in the process of these other bigger conversations
that we're having.
So that's one. The other really big theme that I want to just discuss really quickly
is the question around... And these themes are somewhat linked, but the question around
not-for-profit versus for-profit drug development. The current medical system also is really
reliant on a for-profit pharmaceutical model, which not only has the problems that I just
described in this last little bit of the conversation, but also, frankly, is really expensive and
is very difficult to ensure that the actual process of developing these substances in
legal terms is available.
So I think that that's another big question that the movement will have to grapple with
and decide. Although MAPS, we were working on a hybrid, non-profit, for-profit model
with the MAPS Public Benefit Corporation. There's a diversity of perspectives around
how we as a movement should be dealing with that and how we should be moving forward.
And that was another major theme.
And finally, just to wrap this thought up, the other big theme that came up a lot is
how the West and the North can be in right relation with Indigenous communities who've
offered us not only the substances that they've been using, whether they're plants or molecules
or whatever else, but also how we as a movement can be mindful of how we articulate access
to psychedelics in the long run. Because although there is a lot more attention, again, as you
mentioned, to these social issues, they will inevitably repeat themselves and they will
inevitably kind of be unearthed in this process of talking about medicine, especially because
psychedelics have this particular unique quality, even in their use, where they, like I said
earlier, kind of pull out all of the stuff that people try to keep down. And I think
dealing with that in the light will be really important with the movement moving forward.
And you saw a lot of that.
And actually, I should just add, I'm going really with some of the most critical big
issues, but the other big takeaway from the conference was that there's some amazing science
happening and that we're making a tremendous amount of progress. And I think that you and
your listeners should be on the lookout for a tremendous, tremendous amount of scientific
progress and evidence-based progress in the next two to four years, especially. In the
immediate future, we'll see a lot of really, really big research coming out around how
these substances induce mystical states or heightened states of consciousness or therapeutic
states or how different forms of use can have different positive impacts for a tremendous
number of populations.
So yeah, that's awesome. And I think that's a great way to conclude the conference by
talking about how much great work is being done by science, because I always have thought
that any challenge or any difficulty is an opportunity for something beautiful.
Absolutely. Absolutely.
Let me ask you the last question. I ask all my guests that if you come across an intelligent
alien from a different civilization, what would you say as the worst thing humanity
has done and what would you say as humanity's greatest achievement?
Ooh, that's a fantastic question. I think that the biggest sin, I guess I would say
I'm using that language sort of facetiously, but kind of not. The biggest sin that humanity
has committed has allowed itself and actually created systems that have promoted the separation
between us and the Earth and us and the stars. I think that our lack of empathy toward the
Earth and toward the literal home that we live on has translated into this deep lack
of empathy for each other. And I think a lot of the harms that we're seeing and the big
mistake I guess that I would say that I've seen that I think that we're really trying
to solve is this deep instinct that humanity has been trained and conditioned into that
there is an other. I think that's a big mistake to believe that there is an other, that we're
not all part of the same energetic ecological biological ecosystem. And I think that that
was a big mistake. And I think that the bigger mistake and the worst thing that we've done
is really turn what was maybe a mistake or something that happened as a result of a variety
of major social changes over the course of history and then weaponize that. And I think
turn that into something that now people make money off of and hurt other human beings off
of. I think that's one of the biggest tragedies that humanity has kind of unearthed in our
own consciousness. I think the best thing, humanity has done some pretty amazing things.
I think that I have to give a lot of credit to like Indian food. I think Indian food is
one of the best things that humanity has done. But you know, I'm biased because I've got
Indian heritage. But no, but on a more serious note, I think that entire framework and process
of storytelling, and in particular, verbal storytelling, it's one of the reasons I love
doing podcasts and I got it's been fantastic talking to you because I think that the art
of verbal storytelling, like the art of oral communication, and not only like the information
that's contained in the that in those conversations and conversation and in storytelling, but
also all of the social and cultural kind of elements that go with storytelling with, you
know, the aspect of intergenerational learning, the aspect of articulating our experiences
for others to share the aspect of integrating challenging experiences, you know, whether
it's with a psychedelic or because you went out into the forest and had a crazy experience
with like a bear, I don't know, like whatever, whatever the experience is, I think that developing
and cherishing the art of storytelling has been one of the most amazing things that humans
have done. And I really look forward to storytelling, you know, the simple act of sharing personal
experience as being one of the front and centerpieces of this movement for not just access to psychedelics,
but really access to a more empathetic and compassionate society moving forward.
