we need to debate how warfare itself is changing. If the planes that are bombing people have no
pilots in them, and the operators of those planes are sitting safely in the middle of
the United States, it's kind of confusing. Hello, and welcome to the 18th episode of
Neo Human Podcast. I'm Agar Bahari, an ecologist on Twitter and Instagram, and you can follow the
show on LiveInLimbo.com, iTunes, and soon on YouTube. With me today is Hugh Gusterson. Welcome
to the show, Hugh. It's a pleasure to be here. Let's start with some background, some of the
works you've done and what you're working on now these days. Sure. I'm an anthropologist by training
and I teach anthropology and international affairs at George Washington University.
Originally, I was going to do field work in Africa in the 1980s. I was a grad student at the time.
There was a massive nuclear freeze movement against the nuclear arms race. I took an odd
turn in my career and decided to write about the culture of American nuclear weapons designers
instead. Much of my work has been on different aspects of the culture of American militarism.
I've written a couple of books about nuclear weapons designers and anti-nuclear activists.
I've written about counterinsurgency in Iraq and Afghanistan. After this book, I'm finishing up
a third book on what American nuclear weapons scientists do after the end of nuclear testing.
You started as an anti-nuclear activist in the early 80s and went on to
studying the attitudes of nuclear scientists as an anthropologist.
What is the mindset of a nuclear scientist? For the most part, very rational.
Despite the fact that about three quarters of the weapons scientists I interviewed
were active Christians, but they were what you might call sort of moderate secular Christians
for the most part, mainstream denominations like Catholics, Methodists, Presbyterians,
Episcopalians. They had a strong faith that the weapons they designed would never be used. I even
had weapons scientists say to me that they would not feel ethically comfortable working on weapons
like napalm or landmines because those weapons would be used to kill people. They were confident
that their weapons would be used to deter World War III. Some weapons scientists told me that they
felt personally proud. They thought they'd saved millions of lives by making a war between the
Americans and the Soviets impossible. They had this sort of faith that human rationality would
make deterrence work in the final instance, that the weapons would not be used. When I asked them
if they ever had nightmares about nuclear war, they would sort of look cross-eyed at me and say,
well, why would I have a nightmare about nuclear war? That would be irrational. Many of the
anti-nuclear activists I interviewed and knew as friends on the other hand were deeply terrified
that deterrence would break down, there would be an accident, there would be a miscalculation,
and millions of people would die. Many of those activists did have nightmares about nuclear war.
In some ways, the division between the activists and the weapons scientists was around emotion
and rationality, with one community strongly confident that the weapons could be relied on
to keep the peace, and the others terrified that there would be a miscalculation. You could say the
weapons scientists were in denial, or you could say the activists were overly emotional. Take your
pick. I was watching a documentary about the state of US nuclear facilities, and they're all using
old computers, big floppy disks, which I would imagine makes it easier to operate based on the
older knowledge, but it makes it harder for hackers to hack into it. What do you think about that
structural, systematic structure that has remained the same throughout all these technological
advancements in the past couple of years? Well, I think you're talking about the technology that's
used at the missile launch control facilities. That's right. I read that article as well. I don't
know if they deliberately failed to upgrade as a safety measure, or if this was an unintended
benefit of being behind the times. Strangely enough, there's a parallel story. The Soviets used to
rely on pre-digital technology with vacuum tubes that were resistant to electromagnetic pulse from
a nuclear explosion. This was just because they didn't have the resources to upgrade, but their
planes would have survived a nuclear war better than American planes, as it turns out. I suspect
this is just an accidental benefit of a failure to keep up with the times, but it is funny that
these ancient three-inch floppy disks could make American nuclear missiles more resistant to
hacking. I should say that at the weapons labs, they do have state-of-the-art facilities there to
do research. They have some of the fastest supercomputers in the world. Their machines are
usually listed somewhere in the top 10 in terms of speed and storage capability.
Because the weapons labs haven't been allowed to test a nuclear weapon since 1992, they largely rely
on extremely powerful supercomputer simulations of nuclear tests to maintain the stockpile. The
United States, as your listeners may or may not know, still has about 7,000 nuclear weapons.
And somehow the weapons labs have to assure that they work. So they have very expensive
state-of-the-art lasers, simulation machines, and supercomputers. So on the design end of things,
they're certainly not behind the times. I'll have more questions about nuclear weapons.
I'll come back to them. But let's talk about your new book. The new book is called Drone Remote
Control Warfare. What's the book about and what inspired you to write it now?
Well, I think the United States has entered into a new form of warfare, drone warfare.
It's on the edge of American consciousness. Everyone in the United States is aware that
this kind of warfare is being practiced. The details are not widely known. The United States
has adopted a policy that it feels free to assassinate people in countries at which it
is not a war, to conduct military operations in countries like Yemen, Pakistan, Somalia,
where it's not a war, even the Philippines. The U.S. has done two drone strikes on the Philippines.
There's been almost no debate about this in Congress. On the very rare occasions where
there's a hearing, almost no congressmen show up. The reporters often just report that a strike
took place. It's a very brief article. So-and-so, according to the Pentagon, was killed, the Taliban
leader, or whatever. I think the fact that the United States is conducting military operations
that have not been approved by Congress, in some cases, it has deliberately killed American
citizens without any kind of judicial process that would legitimate the execution of the death
penalty. We need more debate about that. And I think we need to debate how warfare itself is
changing if the planes that are bombing people have no pilots in them and the operators of those
planes are sitting safely in the middle of the United States. It's kind of confusing. Do those
people deserve medals? Are they people who've been in combat or not? Are they legitimate targets for
the enemy? If the Taliban could somehow get someone to Nevada, would it be okay for them to blow up a
drone operator? Lots of very interesting kinds of questions that need exploration.
It's excellent. I was going to ask you, how does the ability to fight wars remotely affecting the
human side of war? Because we see that a lot of those operators, they're saying that they go to
work at like eight in the morning and they shoot some missile somewhere across the world, and then
they just go back and have dinner with their family in the same city. How does the ability to
not being involved personally in wars affecting the human side of war, whether it's soldiers or
civilians? Well, I think on the receiving end of the strikes, there's a very strong feeling that
this is a very cowardly way of conducting warfare. In some perverse kind of way, I think civilians in
places like Afghanistan and Yemen feel the way about drone strikes that Americans do about suicide
bomber strikes, that it's just not cricket, if you like, to attack people in such a way that you
can't be attacked in reverse. If you're a suicide bomber, you preemptively kill yourself. And if
you're a drone operator, you're just not around to be attacked. So for people on the receiving end,
there's this strong sense that this new form of warfare is cowardly, it's unfair.
And American policymakers can be very puzzled about this. They point out that the drones
are often more discriminating than an F-16 would be, that they kill fewer civilians by accident.
And so they say, we don't understand why the people in these other countries are so angry
about drone strikes that tend to kill fewer civilians. But I think the key to the anger
lies in this perception that it's a form of warfare that's cowardly. As for the operators in the
United States, we're seeing reports of very high levels of stress. Now, some people say it's because
they work very long hours. They work 12-hour shifts, often six days a week. Some people say
it's because the battle zone is not sort of clearly, clearly demarcated. You leave your family,
your wife and kids, or your husband and kids in the morning, you leave your family, your wife and
kids in the morning, drive to this pod, sit in this pod for 12 hours, keeping people under
surveillance and sometimes killing them. And then you drive to pick up the kids from soccer and
have dinner with them. Psychologically, I think that's very disturbing and very jarring. The two
Hollywood depictions we have of drone warfare, the good kill and eye in the sky, both suggest
that it's subjectively quite stressful for the operators. And that's what journalistic accounts
as well, high levels of risk for divorce, alcoholism, and so on. It's an interesting
question why the Pentagon didn't decide to base these drone operators outside the US. They don't
have to put them in the battle zone. They could put them in a military base in Abu Dhabi or in
Turkey or somewhere like that. And I think they might feel subjectively more as if they were at
war than they do by being commuter warriors. What drone strikes are the continuation of the war on
terror that started by or started as September 11. But on the American side, it was waged by
George W. Bush, but then it continued throughout the entire Obama administration. How do you feel
about the increase of remote drone operations during Obama administration? I think it's very
interesting that the president who got elected originally by being so opposed to the war in Iraq,
if not the war in Afghanistan, but by being a strong critic of many aspects of the war on terror
and a critic of Guantanamo, it's interesting that he escalated the use of drone strikes so much.
At one point during his presidency, the US was doing one drone strike every three days in Pakistan,
a country where, I would remind you listeners, the US is not in a declared war. I mean, that's
very, very intense. This is in what year? It was in the middle years, around 2010, 11, 12. He's
backed off of that to some degree now. I think there is something in President Obama's psyche
that is drawn to drones. I think this idea that you can make a very cautious, thought-out decision,
that you can gather data for hours or even days, and then make a decision that you're going to
excise this person. There's something superficially sort of clean and rational about that,
that appeals to him. President Bush was much more about sort of swagger and shock and awe,
and there's this sort of cold use of violence that typifies the Obama administration. He will be
known, I think, as the drone president. I do find it very ironic that a president with a background
in constitutional law is the president whose administration has said that it has the legal
right to kill American citizens in other countries without any kind of judicial process. I find that
quite disturbing. Many lawyers do as well, lawyers from conservative as well as liberal
backgrounds. A lot of people have the concern that those kind of operations may start happening
inside the United States for many different issues, surveillance, putting privacy and security of
civilians in jeopardy. What do you think about that? Well, I end the book with this very short
chapter where I lay out two possible futures around drones. The future is concerned not only
the use of drones in other countries, but they're used domestically within the United States.
One is sort of a situation where the drones are very well regulated and used in very restricted
ways. The other is the nightmarish scenario for the future, which I'm sorry to say I consider to
be the more likely one. Part of that concerns the possibility of escalating use of drones by
law enforcement within the US. Already, drones are used to police the US-Mexican border, for example.
Now, they're not used in a lethal capacity, they're just used to give us surveillance and
to direct law enforcement on the ground to intercept groups of people coming across that
border illegally. They're also used in domestic law enforcement situations to
overfly demonstrations and so on, but again, just in a surveillance capacity.
I suggest that it's not hard to imagine a situation where there would be some kind of emergency,
you know, someone like the person who killed 50 people in a nightclub in Orlando this weekend
is on the run, highly armed, you're worried they're going to kill more people. And so on a one-time
only basis, you make an exception. You say that if the drone gets this person in their sights,
they're authorized to kill them from the air. And then you've created that precedent, and it becomes
easier to do it the next time when there's another kind of emergency. Gradually, it becomes more and
more routinized. You can imagine that such a course of action would happen where it's sort of
marginal and hated to targets that are at issue. It could be people trying to come across the border
illegally from Mexico. It could be drug dealers. But I can imagine by sort of unintentional stealth,
a set of precedents being set that would lead to a routinization of the use of drones, not only for
surveillance in the US, but for lethal purposes, too. What are your thoughts on the issue of privacy?
Apple versus FBI case would be a good example that it's really becoming more about security versus
freedom to have the kind of information that we want to decide to keep it private. How do you feel
about that? What do you think about it? I know I'm very disturbed by the revelations that we learned
by Edward Snowden about the ways in which the NSA in particular has the capability to gather enormous
amounts of data on American citizens, to listen in on their phone conversations, to track all of
their email, to use their cell phones to monitor their whereabouts and so on. I think in that
respect, drones may not be as much of a concern as the way the NSA can use its information technology,
the information infrastructure, to track our whereabouts, who we talk to, who we meet with,
and so forth. I think for drones, in terms of privacy, the area of concern there may actually
have to do with privately owned drones. You can buy a drone off the shelf from Target or Amazon
for just a few hundred dollars. You could get a nice drone with a nice video capability.
And one can imagine a situation where an angry spouse would use such a drone
to track the behavior of their former partner. You can imagine neighbors buying on their neighbors.
You could imagine sort of peeping drone scenarios and so on. So some of the concerns I have to do
not with government misuse of drones to invade our privacy, but the way citizens can invade each
other's privacy. There have already been a number of instances where people have taken guns and shot
down drones that were over their houses. And so far the courts have ruled in favor of the drone
owners, not the shooters in those cases. One of the conspiracy theorists, most famous
radio host, he started this sport shooting down drones with shotguns and they're doing that in
Texas. Well, I don't recommend that. No, definitely not. And I think there's a real concern if we're
talking about the privately owned drones in terms of terrorism and accident, there have been a number
of instances reported now where privately owned drones have become very close to commercial jet
liners on takeoff and landing from an airport. And the way things are going, if we extrapolate,
it's just a matter of time until one of those drones hits a jetliner. If it gets sucked into
the engine, it's quite possible it could bring a commercial plane down. And I think we have to worry
now it's been done. People have attached handguns and chainsaws to drones and flown them. It'd be
very simple to attach a primitive kind of improvised explosive to a drone. You could imagine attaching
some sort of crude chemical weapon to a drone. So I'm sorry to say this, but we have to worry
about attacks on sports stadiums and public events by people wanting to sell terror and mayhem.
I agree. You mentioned regulating drones. The first thing came to my mind was the guy who made
the open source 3D model of a handgun that anybody can download and 3D print different pieces in
different places and just put them together and just get a bullet and use it. So drones have the
same possibility and anything else that can be used for destructive or beneficial purposes, right?
Yeah. And I want to emphasize that there are beneficial purposes for drones. They used to
inspect high power lines. And if you do those inspections with humans, a number of them get
killed in accidents exposed to high voltage. Much better to do with a drone if you can.
At Fukushima, they've used drones to try and sample radiation levels in a place where you
don't want to send humans in. The World Wildlife Federation uses a drone in Africa to hunt for
poachers. You can use drones to look for mass graves in places where there have been atrocities
to monitor environmental damage and so on. So I mean, there are beneficial uses to these as well.
In terms of the private drone industry, hobbyist drones, I really wish that the US government
had stricter rules for registering these drones. They just announced some rules a few months ago,
and they're extremely weak. If you own a drone, you're supposed to go to a website,
register it, print out a registration number which you put on your drone. It would be much
better if they were registered at the point of sale, if every drone was sold with a unique
registration number, and you were forced to register it when you bought it. Then misbehavior
with drones could be more easily tracked, and there could be realistic penalties for people
who misuse drones either violently or for surveillance.
Do you think that we'll begin to see the same problem that we see with gun control now with
drones? Well, the drone industry isn't nearly as powerful as a lobbying force as the National
Rifle Association, but it looked to me as if the rules that the Obama administration issued a few
months ago were weak, partly because there was a strong lobbying effort by the drone industry.
The book is called Drone Remote Control Warfare. It came out in May, and it's,
I would imagine, available on all the major digital distributors and everywhere that they
sell books, right? Indeed.
With the rise of tension around the world, you mentioned the tragedy in Orlando. Would
it be fair to say that ultimately it's the militarized technology, whether it's drones
or robots or anything else, that will determine the successes and failures?
I think that the war on terror is unwinnable the way that we are currently fighting it,
and it becomes a self-perpetuating phenomenon. Everything that the United States does in order
to win the war on terror, whether it be in Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Somalia, seems to
excite further opposition. One notices with the kill lists that are used to determine targets
for the drones, the kill lists get longer. The more people we kill, the longer the kill
lists get. Now, why is that? Part of the reason for that is that the drone strikes excite as
much opposition as they do good. Okay, so you take out an al-Qaeda leader or you take out
a Taliban leader. They're replaced pretty quickly. The person who replaces them is really angry
about what the US did. They have something to prove. They have to prove to their followers
that they're tough. It's not uncommon to find that when a drone takes out an al-Qaeda leader,
the level of violence in that region actually goes up, not down, in the weeks afterwards,
because new, more radical, angry people with something to prove replace the person who was
killed. In the meantime, if the drone strikes are killing innocent civilians, that makes it easier
to recruit new members of the insurgency. At this point, the so-called war on terror is the longest
war the United States has ever fought. The Taliban controls more of Afghanistan right now
than it's controlled in years. It's going nowhere. It's this perpetual war. We're always told there's
some new technology that's finally going to help us turn the corner. It's fool's gold.
So you're not an optimist about the outcome of this war?
I'm not. In Afghanistan, we have to negotiate with the Taliban. We have to get the Afghan
government together with the Taliban and with the US and Europeans at the table as well,
and try to bow out from Afghanistan as gracefully as we can, leave behind some sort of architecture
that will make the country as stable as possible. I assume the American taxpayer in such a situation
would want to wash the hands of the country, which would be a sad mistake. What Afghanistan would need
in such a situation is a lot of material resources to help them rebuild. But it's only through
negotiation and diplomatic settlement that peace and rebuilding will come.
What are your thoughts on Iran? Because one of the outcomes of the beginning years of war on terror
was that the United States got rid of two of Iran's biggest enemies, Taliban on one side, Saddam
Hussein on one side, and that freed up Iran to start their hegemonic exportation of their
Shia interpretation of Islamic revolution. What are your thoughts on that country at this point?
I'm not an expert on Iran, so I want to be very cautious here. My perception of Iran is that it's
a country that's sort of on a knife's edge. The hardliners in Iran feed on the actions from the
hardliners in the United States. So the question is whether the kind of agreement that Obama reached
with moderates will open space for a gradual democratic evolution in Iran. And I really
wouldn't care to predict the answer, but I do know that just taking a hardline action in the past
wasn't getting us anywhere. Do you see the chance of a new nuclear arm race this time in Middle East
as a consequence of the nuclear agreement with Iran? Because one of the first reactions that we
saw was from Saudi Arabia, that they asked for the exact same privileges that Iran got with their
nuclear program. And we know that if Saudi Arabia and Emirates and Qatar and those people decide to
get nuclear weapons, they don't need to develop a program. They can just buy it from Pakistan.
I'm a supporter of the nuclear agreement with Iran. It was clear that despite the sanctions,
the Iranians were able to keep making progress in the direction of a nuclear weapon. I don't
think it was established that they intended to build the weapon. It looked to me as if they
wanted to have the capability to build the weapon. Should they ever make that decision?
It wasn't clear to me that that decision had been made. The nuclear agreement does put them
several months backwards from there by dismantling all those centrifuges, ticking away some of the
highly enriched uranium that they had. I would hope that more reasonable actors in countries
like Saudi Arabia would feel reassured rather than threatened by the agreement with Iran,
and particularly the inspectors' access makes it harder for the Iranians to hide bad things.
But one can understand how symbolically a rapprochement between Iran and the United
States would be threatening to city powers in the region, and for that reason, they might feel that
they wanted to move closer to a weapons capability.
From the point of view of an anthropologist...
Can I just say one more thing about the Middle East issue, by the way?
Of course.
I noticed that when we discuss nuclear proliferation in the United States, and we talk about the
countries that have nuclear weapons, there is one country that's always somehow forgotten,
and it's in the Middle East, and it's not a Muslim country. It's Israel.
Israel, yes.
Israel has its thoughts about 100 nuclear weapons. Some of them may be hydrogen bombs,
according to some accounts. It's the foundational assumption of realist thinking in security
studies that it's very dangerous to have a region where one side has nuclear weapons and the other
doesn't. We should worry that the agreement with Iran may be provocative to Saudi Arabia and so on,
but the deeper concern that we should have is that we have a region there
where one country that feels extremely insecure about its right to exist has a monopoly in the
region on weapons of mass destruction, and something has to be done about that situation.
It can't just be left alone.
The argument, as I understand it, from the Israeli side is that Israel needs to win every single war
because they can't afford to lose even one. If they lose one, they're going to be banished
from the face of the earth, as Iranians, for example, are calling it for.
Yeah.
So they're using that as a status and defense of measures. What do you think?
First of all, just a sort of footnote on banishing Israel from the face of the earth.
That's a quote from Ahmadinejad when he was leader of Iran, and friends who are experts
in Iran do tell me that his comment there was mistranslated. But what he said was that over
the sands of time would erase Israel. It wasn't that there was a threat that Iran would make it
happen. He just predicted that it would go away. But that to one side, you know-
Just a note. It was said by, in the very beginning of the revolution, I'm originally from Iran,
by Ayatollah Khomeini, who was the leader of the revolution that Israel needs to,
we need to wipe Israel off the map. And what Ahmadinejad says, even though he was not
interpreted exactly as what he said it, but I don't think it has any kind of practicality
to wipe down any country, but they're using that for their internal purposes and also getting
together a lot of Muslims in the region who just don't like Israel.
Yeah. Well, we can easily understand why Israel would feel deeply insecure. I mean, it's been
attacked in 1967, 1973. There have been attempts by its neighbors to either wipe it off the map
or steal lots of its territory. It's a very small, non-Arab country surrounded by very
militarized Arab countries. So you can understand why it would feel insecure and why it would want
to have a nuclear deterrent. At the same time, it has a history of acting quite aggressively
towards its neighbors. And so its nuclear stockpile and its other foreign policy actions
will make its neighbors feel insecure as well. This is the way militarism works. People feel
insecure about another country that has a weapons capability because it feels insecure about you,
and it becomes this action-reaction cycle that can, if it's not controlled, lead to disaster.
And so as long as Israel has nuclear weapons, one can imagine why some of Israel's
neighbors might want to acquire them too. From the point of view of an anthropologist,
can we get rid of war altogether? In other words, can humans at their current state of evolution
operate without war? Great question. So many people say that war is just part of human nature.
The anthropological records suggest otherwise. Aggression and violence is certainly part of
the human experience everywhere. Anthropologists have found no society where people don't, from
time to time, kill each other and attack each other and get into conflicts. But that's different
from war. Warfare is a social institution. It's quite different from beating up your spouse or
getting into a fistfight with someone in a bar. That's not war. That's aggression and violence.
Anthropologists have found a number of societies that have no experience of organized warfare,
that have no experience of organized warfare, not even a word for warfare. Unfortunately,
these societies were egalitarian hunter-gatherer types of societies that have largely been wiped
out by colonialism, industrialization, and modernization. But it does suggest that it's
within the capability of the human species, it is part of our potential repertoire
to live without warfare as an organized institution. Very interesting. Back to nuclear
weapons, they have been perhaps the most serious of a threat to the planet and the civilization's
safety and security. How have they evolved in their approach towards nuclear weapons since the
end of Cold War? And how do you see this evolution continue? So the way the United States and the
Soviet Union conducted the nuclear arms race during the Cold War is that they were constantly
competing with one another, both quantitatively and qualitatively. They were trying to build up
larger stockpiles than each other, and they were trying to design new kinds of weapons with new
kinds of capabilities. That might have meant... It didn't necessarily mean that they were more
destructive, that the warheads were more destructive. It might have meant that the
destructiveness was customized in some way, that you would minimize the blast effect but
optimize the radiation output, as in the neutron bomb or something like that.
Many of the qualitative improvements of weapons in the Cold War had to do with accuracy or with
putting lots and lots of warheads on a single missile. So in the 70s, both sides figured out
how to move their missiles. That's to put multiple warheads on the missiles. So you could launch one
missile, but you could destroy 10 cities with it half an hour later when it reentered the atmosphere
or trying to make them so accurate that they could land within 100 feet of their target.
They built enormous stockpiles, 70,000 nuclear weapons at its height in the Cold War, an
astonishing number of these weapons. Interestingly, the pursuit of security through qualitative and
quantitative improvements actually produced insecurity. So the more accurate the weapons
became, the more each side worried that the other side might be able to preemptively destroy its
weapons before it could use them. In particular, the moving of the weapons, putting multiple
warheads on them, increased the risk that one country could destroy 10 of the other countries'
missiles with just one missile of its own, because each missile could send 10 warheads
at different targets. So by the end of the Cold War, both sides were much less secure and safe
than they had been at the beginning of the arms race. There were more of the weapons,
they were more accurate, and the configuration had become much less stable from an deterrence
point of view. What has happened since then is that there's been an enormous diminution in the
number of the weapons. So the US now only has 7,000 weapons, and many of them are sort of in the
closet. They're not on active deployment. They're on sort of reserve standby status.
So the numbers have come down. There's still enough that you could effectively end most of
human life on the planet, which is not good, but the numbers have come down. No one has tested a
nuclear weapon since India and Pakistan. Well, I guess the North Koreans have tested nuclear
weapons, but the superpowers haven't tested nuclear weapons since the early 1990s. The US
hasn't done a nuclear test since September 1992. So both countries are pretty much stuck with the
stockpiles that they used to have. In the absence of nuclear testing, you can sort of maintain the
old weapons and make sure they work, but you can't design new ones with fundamentally new capabilities.
And that itself is a stabilizing factor. Now, the problem is that this technology is now pretty old
technology. I mean, it was developed in the 1940s originally. A group of physics undergraduates at
one of our leading universities, if they had access to the nuclear material, could easily
make a nuclear weapon that would work very well. And that means that the danger of proliferation,
including to terrorist groups, to subnational actors, is greatly increased. So what we're seeing
in terms of the nuclear policy debate, which I find very interesting, is there are a number of
people who used to be hawks, who used to believe in the arms race, who have now become nuclear
abolitionists. I'm thinking of people like William Perry, who was Secretary of Defense under Bill
Clinton, Henry Kissinger, and William Schultz, who was Secretary of State for Ronald Reagan.
They now advocate the abolition of nuclear weapons. And I think the reason that they advocate this
is that they're terrified that terrorists and subnational actors will get their hands on this
technology if it stays around. We mentioned being terrified of terrorists. I want to ask you about
Donald Trump, if you don't mind. Sure. You being in Washington, you're in the center of this crazy
show, I would say, that is going on in the US politics now. How do you feel about the very
possibility of Donald Trump presidency, and as famously said by many people, his fingers being
on the nuclear coats? Well, I can't say it makes me terribly happy. I noticed my daughter, who's in
third grade, came home one day and said, so what country are we moving to if Donald Trump wins?
Apparently, it's penetrated the consciousness of third graders in Washington.
The guy is unpredictable. With nuclear weapons, unpredictability is not a good thing.
What the superpowers learned over time is that you want cool-headed people who think carefully
before they act. They don't do things rashly. They talk a lot to their enemies. If they make threats,
the threats are very carefully coded. They leave themselves space so they can back down if the
threats aren't met. That doesn't sound much like Donald Trump to me. What is the future of war?
What is the future of war? Well, I would hope it doesn't have much of a future, but at the moment,
it looks like it has a very good future. The future of war will look very different in
advanced industrial countries like the United States and in parts of Africa and Asia and so on.
What we see in the Middle East and in Africa right now is that there's increasing hybridization
between warfare and gang violence and the black economy and drug trafficking and so on.
It creates an utterly miserable situation for ordinary people. It produces these mass
flows of migrants that we're seeing out of the Middle East, particularly Syria right now.
People in the United States are terrified of terrorist attack and so on, but they get off
pretty lightly. Warfare is largely something that happens in other people's territory.
There's a strong faith in the United States that technology will keep us safe. The technologies
that the United States are talking about for the next generation have to do with an
intensification of surveillance and something I find somewhat troubling, a strong move to
artificial intelligence. These would be autonomous weapons. It's not just that the drone would not
have a pilot in it, but it wouldn't even be operated by someone from Nevada. You would
program it how to tell terrorists from civilians, and it would make its own decisions to attack.
And who's responsible when it makes a mistake and destroys a village? I don't know.
Speaking of artificial intelligence and the whole technological advancement that we're
experiencing, how are we evolving as species in the 21st century?
Well, genetically, we're not evolving very much at all, though I guess there are technologies
that hold out the prospect that we could take charge of our genetic evolution.
But as a species, we're evolving in a direction where there's this increasing chasm between
societies, between the have and the have-not societies, and within societies, between the
haves and the have-nots. What academics call neoliberalism, which is this brutal intensification
of capitalism that we've seen in the last 20 or 30 years, is sort of rolling back the clock on
gains that were made against inequality following World War II. All of the metrics show that the
United States is becoming a more and more unequal society, so we seem to be evolving in a direction
of more and more inequality, which can only create social problems. It is likely to create
more violence within society. At the same time, societies are becoming more and more multicultural.
So I think one of the interesting questions that the Trump campaign raises, if you could
put Trump side-by-side with Bernie Sanders, you see that there are two narrative responses to
neoliberalism there. Bernie Sanders is saying it's about inequality between classes and trying to
encourage people to think about inequality in economic terms. Trump is encouraging people
in a multicultural context to think through inequality in terms of inequality and inequality.
Through inequality in terms of what ethnic others they want to scapegoat. So I think a major
political question for the United States in the next 10 years is how we will react to the objective
increase in inequality. Will we do it through increasing racial tension and ethnic scapegoating?
Or will we see the return of sort of mass class-based movements like those of the 1930s
that might span different ethnic groups? How can we get ready for such a future?
By talking about it, thinking about it, talking to our friends and our neighbors about it.
Professors have to talk about it in their classes. Novelists have to write about it.
Hollywood movie makers have to make movies about it. Politicians have to turn their backs on the
special interest donations and talk honestly about it. Just out of curiosity, what percentage of
the nuclear scientists that you were studying were women? It will sound like a low percentage
because it was something like 6 or 7%. The objective numbers I have are from the 80s,
so I should caution your listeners that those numbers have surely changed since then.
But in the 80s, it was 6 or 7%. That may sound pretty terrible, but actually,
if you looked at the percentage of American PhDs in physics that went to women,
women were overrepresented in the weapons labs. I know a number of women nuclear weapons designers.
They like to joke that women are better at nuclear weapons design than men
because they think holistically. A kind of technical problem that requires
holistic thinking where you understand how one parameter changes in sync with other parameters
and so on. At Los Alamos, there is a nuclear weapons design and crocheting group.
Interesting. The book is called Drone Remote Control Warfare. We've been speaking with
Hugh Gusterson for the past 40 minutes. I'm going to ask you the last question. I'm asking
all my guests that if you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization,
what would you say is the worst thing humanity has done and what would you say is humanity's
greatest achievement? I should have listened to the end of your other shows so I know what
other people said. The worst thing has to be some of the terrible atrocities of the 20th century,
Auschwitz, Hiroshima, the mass killing that we've engaged in, Rwanda.
The best thing, some of our wonderful music, some of our wonderful plays, Shakespeare movies.
I don't know if an alien would really understand that. We don't know if aliens would appreciate art.
