The worst thing that can happen is the Chinese take the lead in genetic engineering.
They take the lead in nanotech and AI development.
And the way in which they roll out these technologies, which have the potential to fundamentally
alter the parameters of human existence, are ways that are going to lead to the degradation
of human individuality, to the degeneration of the potential for genius and innovative
creative thought.
I can well imagine the Chinese using gene editing to recalibrate the human being into
something more, quote unquote, cooperative, into a more cooperative citizen, which also
by the same token is less capable of independent innovative thought.
And that would be an utter catastrophe.
Jason Reza-Giorgiani, PhD, welcome to the 87th episode of Neo Human Podcast, sir.
It's a pleasure to be with you, Aga.
Yeah, I'm looking forward to this conversation.
And kudos and shout out to Julia Prisco, who recommended your book, which I really want
to talk about the book called Prometheism, which is the beginning of a movement, I believe,
called the Prometheus Movement, right?
Yeah, it's a synthesis of the words Prometheus and theism, Prometheism.
Excellent.
So, I mainly want to talk about that, but I also want to talk about politics and Iran.
And let's see where the conversation leads us.
Absolutely.
Shoot.
Yeah, let's start with your background, though, just so we have some kind of a context that
where your thoughts are coming from, you know, the work you've done, the lives you've lived
and what are you mainly focused on now these days?
Well, I did my master's at NYU and my master's, first of all, I'm born and raised in New York
City.
So, I'm a lifelong native New Yorker and I'm of Persian paternal descent.
And my mother is an American of many generations who ultimately hails from Northern European
background, a lot of Celtic and a lot of Nordic blood in her background.
But her family has been in America for many generations.
In fact, they've been New Yorkers as well for a couple of generations.
So, that's my family background.
And you know, I went to school here in New York.
I did an MA thesis on universal human rights and the problem of Islamic democracy at NYU.
And there I was analyzing the philosophical foundations of the UDHR, the UN Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, and showing how it's internally contradictory because its
provision for an unqualified freedom of religion allows so-called Islamic democracies to undermine
the human rights of minorities who are dissenting within that society.
And so, I was trying to expose this loophole in the UDHR, going back even into the drafting
debates in Paris and in San Francisco that produced the Universal Declaration and showing
how there were representatives from various countries, oddly enough, including the Soviet
Union, who understood that this was a serious problem that would undermine the coherence
of the declaration.
And they wanted a very carefully worded, qualified freedom of religion that would protect universal
human rights from some, how could I put it, disingenuous attempt to use freedom of religion
to then institute something like Sharia law and divest citizens of their other basic rights
like the equality of women or freedom of conscience, freedom of expression, freedom of the press,
so on and so forth.
So, that was my MA thesis work.
And then I did a PhD at the State University of New York on philosophy of science and technology.
And there, I was looking at the empirical evidence from basically a century of research
in parapsychology to argue in favor of something like Heidegger's thesis about the ontological
priority of technology over science, that when you look at an existential level, when
you look at technology and science, you see that people usually have the relationship
between them backwards, that technology is not applied theoretical science.
Technological innovation is not an application of what is understood through some kind of
putatively pure theoretical scientific research.
Actually, theoretical science is grounded on technology.
And in fact, the human existence itself emerges from out of our pre-human hominid relationship
with technology.
So technology is the more existentially primary phenomenon.
And I used the evidence from parapsychology to argue that and to argue against overly
reductive materialistic paradigms in science.
And then the upshot of my doctoral dissertation, which developed into my book, Prometheus and
Atlas, from out of which I developed the core thesis of my book, Prometheus and Atlas, was
that Heidegger was right to suggest that technology has, I suppose, what you would call a spiritual
essence, that there is a spirit of technology, a motivating spirit or genius, a spectral
essence of technology.
And I argued that that spectral essence of technology is Promethean in nature.
So on the other side of the exhaustion and implosion of these reductive materialist models
in science is a potential rediscovery of the Promethean spirit that was the wellspring
of technoscientific innovation from the start, particularly in Western civilization, but
in the Indo-European world at large, really.
Very interesting.
The relationship between science and technology, the way that you described it, reminded me
of how we are using mathematics to figure out how the universe works, but it doesn't
mean that the universe works according to mathematics, it's just that we have a tool
that we can discover this unknown that we might end up having many other tools other
than mathematics, but this is something that reveals something that has been there for
perhaps much longer that we can't even comprehend.
Indeed.
And in my beginning in my doctoral work and then very substantively in Prometheus and
Atlas, I look at the deep structure of mathematical thought and connect it to the archetype of
Prometheus, because Prometheus' very name means forethought, and the Greek term from
which we get mathematics, mathesis, is in the name of Prometheus.
That's the methane in Prometheus, and so mathematics is really about casting a net
over the world, a net of abstraction that allows you to understand something about things
that you haven't even researched yet.
So it is a kind of projective anticipation.
Mathematics is ultimately not about number crunching.
At its deepest level, what it is is a mentality that allows you to capture phenomena within
a grid and then project forward from what's happening to what will happen in the future.
It's an anticipatory resoluteness that grasps the world in a very abstract fashion.
And that's really an expression of the human will to gain mastery and dominance over nature
with a view to securing the conditions for human flourishing.
And I don't think it's an accident that that mentality came from out of the Caucasian world.
I say the Caucasian world not to limit it to Europe, but also to include Iran, because
really the first instance of this kind of mathematical mentality in its essence is with
Zoroastrianism.
It's really in Zarathustra that you see this kind of future-oriented mentality in the first
place.
And it's also not coincidental that the other great bastion of technological science in
the world besides Europe was Iran in the medieval period, in what was the European medieval
period.
And so in the Caucasian world at large, whether it's Europe or whether it's Iran, I don't
think it's an accident that that was the cradle from out of which this mathematical mentality
developed, because it's a part of the world where you have very adverse climate conditions,
you have extreme seasonal weather, and people had to learn how to prepare for long cold
winters.
And so this goes again back to the forethought that's characteristic of Prometheus.
Before we move any further, you were the co-founder, I was reading, of Alt-Right Corporation.
Is that right?
That's correct.
Okay, so this term Alt-Right, we never understood what exactly it means, because the moment
anybody brought it up, everybody said, oh, shut up, you're Nazi, racist, but you're very
familiar, I'm sure, with all of these labels that have been given to me as well, that I'm
a Middle Eastern, former refugee, current immigrant, and somehow I'm a bigot and a racist
and an Islamophobe and all those things, just to dare questioning these things.
So let's define this term Alt-Right and then talk a little about Alt-Right Corporation
and how any of that interject into your perspective and philosophical worldview.
Yeah, long story short, I'll give you the nutshell version of it.
So Alt-Right is an abbreviation of alternative right, of course.
And this term was actually coined by a Jewish intellectual, Paul Gottfried, and Richard
Spencer took it over from him, okay?
So Richard Spencer had been using this term Alt-Right beginning, I think, in 2014, 2015,
something like that, but it hadn't really caught on very much.
And there was this phenomenon in Europe which was much more significant called the new right,
nouvelle droite, and my book, Prometheus and Atlas, had been published by the leading
new right, nouvelle droite publisher, Arctos Media, in 2016.
Which you're the founder of, Arctos Media?
No, no, no, no, I became editor-in-chief of Arctos for about a year, and I'll get into
how that happened.
So alternative right is an alternative to what?
It's an alternative to the mainstream establishment so-called right wing.
And the mainstream establishment, and one of the reasons that it considers itself an
alternative to this is because from the Alt-Right perspective, these modes of political thought
are not really on the right.
So what are we talking about?
Conservatism, okay, so evangelicals who are inclined toward a certain kind of conservatism
in the United States, that's one position that's been characterized as right within
the establishment, you know, a large portion of Congress in the United States basically
subscribes to that political doctrine of a kind of very mainstream conservatism and one
that's inclined toward accepting the moral ideology of evangelical Christianity as the
basis for legislation.
Then you have libertarians, who may not be so favorably inclined toward Christianity,
but who are often characterized as on the right because of their very staunch opposition
to socialism, to social welfare policies, they're wanting to extremely limit the functions
of government and, you know, they're very strong emphasis on, let's say, the right to
bear arms and, you know, to protect your private property and your sort of domestic sphere
from government interference by any and all means necessary.
So you have libertarians, you have conservatives who form kind of a mainstream right, and then
you also have the neoconservatives, the neocons, who are a third sort of branch of the mainstream
right that the alt-right was presenting itself as an alternative to.
And the alt-right's problem with the neocons in particular is that the neocons tend to
be advocates of, you know, perpetual worldwide military intervention.
So they have a program of, you know, serial regime change in various countries carried
out by the United States, and these regime change efforts, you know, are extremely costly
and detrimental to seeing to all kinds of domestic needs, whether it's a deterioration
of infrastructure domestically or other programs that would, you know, benefit American citizens.
When we waste $3 trillion in Iraq basically to remove, I mean, look, you and I are from
a Persian background, so I mean, we hate Saddam Hussein.
Saddam Hussein was a horrible person, okay, who was responsible for, you know, the massacre
of about half a million innocent Iranian civilians.
Be that as it may, you know, stepping back and looking at it relatively objectively,
Saddam Hussein was a secular authoritarian leader, and this $3 trillion was burned to
replace him with a Shiite theocracy on the one hand and a Sunni fundamentalist Islamic
state, on the other hand, okay?
So the alt-right also considered itself an alternative to this kind of pathological neocon
impulse to engage in all these regime change endeavors that are of little benefit to the
American people, in fact, quite likely detrimental to the United States over the long term.
Of course, you know, these interventions in Iraq and Syria also catalyzed the mass migration
into Europe, which has been catastrophic for Europe, mass migration of, you know, people
from the Middle East and North Africa into Europe, including the Libyan attempt at regime
change.
So the alt-right was an extremely amorphous rubric to categorize any one of a number of
right-wing positions that are alternatives to these mainstream types of the political
right, whether it's an alternative to libertarianism or to conservatism or to neoconservatism,
which is actually not really conservative.
It's like a classical liberal position, one that some people trace back to Leo Strauss.
In any case, the alt-right did not have any cohesive or coherent identity other than being
defined against these mainstream forms of quote unquote right-wing politics in the United
States.
And so it was very much up for grabs when I got involved, you know, in 2016, as Trump
was running for office, I was encouraged because my book Prometheus and Atlas did so well in
the Arctos community in the European Nouvelle-Droite.
And because I also had a following in the United States that came largely from my work
in parapsychology and, you know, Prometheus and Atlas being sort of very well received
by the parapsychology research community, I was encouraged to play a mediating role
in integrating three major institutions in what became the alternative right.
So Arctos Press, the leading press of the Nouvelle-Droite in Europe, Red Ice Radio
and Television, which was a program that dealt with parapsychology subjects, UFOs, you know,
all kinds of sort of fringe subject matters, but which took a hard right political turn
around 2015.
And I had had a relationship with, you know, Hendrik Palmgren, the head of Red Ice Radio
and Television, based on, you know, our common interest in the types of subjects covered
in Prometheus and Atlas.
So I was being published by Arctos.
I was involved with Red Ice and then, you know, I was encouraged, you know, to reach
out to Richard Spencer, whose conference, NPI conference in the fall of 2016, I attended
as a representative of Arctos.
This was in D.C.
Yes, this became the infamous Hale-Gate conference, you know, Hale-Trump, Hale-Victory and so
forth with the Roman salute, which I'm not going to make on camera right now.
So because we don't need a secondary defamation.
But I was encouraged to integrate these three organizations into something called the Alt-Right
Corporation.
And my main motivation in doing that at that moment was to make sure that this Alt-Right
did not wind up sinking into the swamp of white nationalism and the kind of, you know,
ghetto of racially narrow minded identity politics.
I had a vision, especially considering we were integrating a European organization with
an American organization and considering the fact that at the same time, like three months,
four months before I got involved with Richard Spencer and I also accepted the position as
editor in chief of Arctos, about four months before that in the late spring of 2016, I
had gotten involved with an organization called the Persian Renaissance Foundation, informally
known as the Iranian Renaissance.
And so my vision was to, and I laid this out in some detail in my book, World State of
Emergency, my second book in 2017.
My vision was to create a pan Indo-European alliance, which would have a European wing,
an American wing, and then connect to future neo-Zoroastrian or neo-Mithraic Iran and India.
And then ultimately end in, oh, go all the way through Russia as well, through Eurasia
and end in the Buddhist East with Japan being the principal representative of the Buddhist
East.
So America, Europe, Russia, Iran, India, and Japan as sort of nodes in a global Indo-European
network that would promote an alternative loosely right wing political philosophy that
would guide humanity through the impending technological singularity in the most constructive
way possible.
That was my vision.
But unfortunately, the people who had encouraged me to play this mediating, unifying role in
the alt-right never came through with their significant capital investment that they promised.
And so long story short, I lost control of the corporation and my associates really went
in their own direction, particularly Richard Spencer, who initially was very much on board
with this Indo-European vision.
But then as the funding didn't come through and as he continued to be caricatured in the
mainstream media as this white nationalist leader, he unfortunately decided to reaffirm
that cardboard cutout that had been made of him.
Because I think in some way it was like a vicious cycle where the more attention he
got from playing that role, the more he felt like he should reaffirm it.
That's the objective though.
Yeah.
Right?
Yeah.
Well, it wasn't my objective.
No, no, no.
The objective of people who are putting labels on people like Spencer and you.
Exactly.
So he fell right into the trap.
He fell right into the trap.
And unfortunately, I wasn't given the material resources to be able to resist that any more
than I did.
And at a certain point, specifically when Charlottesville happened, I couldn't endorse
the direction that the organization was going in.
And so I resigned.
I resigned also from my position as editor-in-chief of Arktos.
And then within about, and I predicted this, I did an interview with NBC right after I
resigned from the Alt-Right Corporation and I predicted that the organization would be
embroiled in infighting and it would disintegrate and implode within a very short time after
I left.
And that's in fact what happened.
I think it lasted about six to eight months after my resignation and then imploded.
Yeah.
Such is a story of human civilization that it's really, really difficult to bring people
together, especially when there is establishment mainstream status quo kind of a force that
is playing the arbiter that I've never heard anybody describe Alt-Right the way that you
did.
And I've never heard until maybe two weeks ago that Steve Bannon start talking about
the purpose of the populist movement today to prevent people who are in charge today
to be in charge when the singularity happens.
But other than that, this is the first time I'm hearing any kind of a directive and any
kind of a coherent technologically based argument and direction coming from the right.
And I think this is a huge gap that exists within the right that they're not talking
about.
What are we going to do in this coming decade to create some kind of a viable alternative?
Because the far left is taking over Google AI department.
There's a civil war going on right there right now, which I'm mind blown.
Nobody's talking about it.
They're targeting all the right places while the other side is talking about you can't
even get the election rights.
That is so obviously flawed.
Well you mentioned Steve Bannon.
This is a book that I would recommend to people who are interested in Steve Bannon.
I'm not entirely happy with the portrayal of me in this book.
I think this guy did a pretty good job overall, but about 30 pages of this book are focused
on my efforts to unify the alt-right.
And the reason I wind up making an appearance in this book is because those who promised
the capital investment in the alt-right corporation had actually, I mean this is what they claimed.
They had intended to make me a liaison between the alt-right and the White House.
And Steve Bannon was supposed to be the interface person.
I was supposed to be the guy who would go into the White House and talk to Steve Bannon
in a kind of respectable fashion on behalf of some more colorful characters in the alt-right.
And so it doesn't surprise me at all that Bannon would make these remarks about preparing
a political ideology that would be adequate to handling the challenges of the technological
singularity.
Because in fact that was exactly the discussion taking place when it was proposed that I act
as this liaison.
So yes, I mean, you know, big tech is in bed with the Chinese.
And you know, whether it's Google, who's effectively, you know, a front for the CIA, or whether
it's, you know, Facebook or Twitter or whatever, these companies are, or Amazon, these companies
are in bed with the Chinese.
And the worst thing that could possibly happen is for the Chinese to take the lead in developing
genetic engineering as they are right now.
I mean, they are literally, I think last week a story came out that they're genetically
engineering super soldiers.
And that was widely reported in the mainstream media.
So the worst thing that could happen is the Chinese take the lead in genetic engineering.
They take the lead in nanotech and AI development.
And the way in which they roll out these technologies, which have the potential to fundamentally
alter the parameters of human existence, are ways in which, are ways that are going to
lead to the degradation of human individuality, to the degeneration of the potential for genius
and innovative creative thought.
I can well imagine the Chinese using gene editing to recalibrate the human being into
something more, quote unquote, cooperative, into a more cooperative citizen, which also
by the same token is less capable of independent innovative thought.
So that would be an utter catastrophe.
And they're doing it right now.
They're doing it right now.
This is not science fiction.
Yeah.
And look, if we're left with a bunch of evangelical conservatives who are already interested in
bombing abortion clinics as our only resistance, we're screwed because there's no way that
a Luddite regressive right wing is going to be able to compete with the Chinese.
We need an archeo-futuristic right wing political ideology that is capable of embracing the
full scope of potential of these emerging technologies.
Yep.
That's exactly what it is.
And I'm not optimistic about, you know, I love United States, but I don't know what
it is.
Is it the openness of the system, or is it just a cultural, the evaluation of the culture
that exists in the system that a lot of it is religious?
Because Chinese have this opportunity to do genetic engineering without having this dead
end of do not interfere in God's business.
You know, while nobody else is talking about, well, it could be God's business that allow
us to genetically experiment with humanity, you know?
Like God's business don't end at any certain kind of a point.
So certainly not a Promethean God.
So please describe this Promethean God, because when I read, I haven't read the entire book,
but I read Julia Prisco's review and I read some excerpts of it.
It seems like it's a new, for lack of a better term, it's a new religion and a philosophy
merge into one for this coming age that has already begun.
Yeah.
So when you look at the myth of Prometheus, you know, there are certain principle characteristics
or basic elements of this archetype that could be the basis for developing a new socio-political
vision, right?
And so Prometheus, he's not just an enlightener God, the God who brings, you know, the fire
of the forge and the light of science to humanity.
He's also the creator of humanity.
You know, in Greek mythology, it's not Zeus who creates humanity.
It's actually Prometheus.
So you know, this whole vision we get in the Ridley Scott films of the engineers having
created humanity in their own image, that's very much in line with the Prometheus myth.
So when I, and then Prometheus is of course also the first martyr God.
You know, it's asked backwards to say that Prometheus is a Christ-like figure because
actually the image of Christ as a God who martyrs himself for humanity, for his children,
is something that's, it's basically being aped from the Prometheus myth.
Christ is aping Prometheus in so far as he's a God who sacrifices himself for his children.
So when I look at the whole structure of the Prometheus myth and then, you know, it's important
not to neglect the fact that the very first installment of this, you know, long story
arc of Prometheus before even the creation of humanity is that Prometheus rebels against
his fellow Titans.
So this guy, he's an inveterate rebel.
He rebels against his fellow Titans against Kronos or Saturn and helps Zeus come to power
and helps to install the Olympians only to realize that Zeus is almost as bad as Kronos
and then he schemes on behalf of humanity against Olympus and aims to also overthrow
Zeus.
So this is the God who's a rebel against all gods.
And so when I look at this whole story arc from Prometheus rebelling against the Titans,
helping Zeus come to power but then turning against Zeus being the creator of humanity
and then someone who gifts humanity with the fire of technological innovation and the light
of scientific knowledge after Zeus subjugates humanity to, you know, slavery and enforced
ignorance and then ultimately Prometheus being willing to be chained to the Caucasus mountains
and have his liver pecked out every day as a martyr god for humanity, certain basic characteristics
of Prometheus jump out at me that could be formulated into principles that would serve
as the basis for a new socio-political vision.
And I would lay those out in the following way.
I'd say there are about seven of them.
The first one would be Prometheus as forethought.
You know, the reason his, because his very name means forethought.
The reason his liver is being pecked out by Zeus's eagle is because the liver was used
for fortune telling in Greece.
It was like, you know, like tea leaf readers reading tea leaves.
So our people who look into crystal balls, a form of augury and fortune telling of prophesying
in archaic Greece was looking into the blackness of the liver by candlelight.
And so Prometheus is the god of forethought and the one who's always thinking ahead.
Prometheus is a creator.
He's the creator of humanity.
Prometheus is also an enlightener.
He fits into the category of all the enlightener gods like Quetzalcoatl or Enki or Ahura Mazda.
He is an enlightener god who brings, you know, science and technology to otherwise benighted
humanity.
And Prometheus is also the god of exploration.
And this comes across particularly clearly in Shelley's rendition of Prometheus, Mary
Shelley's rendition of Prometheus, namely Frankenstein or the modern Prometheus.
There's a whole story within a story presented in that novel that's about, you know, Walton's
seafaring quest of exploration, breaking the Arctic ice and, you know, trying to conquer
the North Pole.
That's another aspect of the Frankenstein story that's often missed in popular culture
is that the quest of Dr. Frankenstein to re-engineer humanity is sort of complemented by this story
of Arctic exploration.
And so the explorer is analogized with the, you know, intrepid scientific genius working
in his laboratory.
And so I would say the exploration that's quintessentially characteristic of the Faustian
West is another, you know, aspect of the Prometheus mythos.
I mean, it's astonishing if you look at the history of exploration of explorers, you know,
mountain climbers, ocean explorers, all people who, you know, penetrated the Amazon jungle.
Almost all of them are from an Indo-European background.
So this is also another characteristic of the Prometheus myth, of the Prometheus archetype.
And then, you know, this will to enlightenment and this boundless exploration always yields
revolution because it is a resistance to the kind of stasis and stagnation characteristic
of different types of tyranny.
And so Prometheus is also, of course, the rebel.
He's the inveterate rebel who rebels against the Titans and then against the Olympians
and who inspires humanity's rebellion in the name of self-determination and being the masters
of our own destiny.
But then, you know, that rebelliousness is perhaps most interestingly expressed in the
trickster aspect of Prometheus.
Prometheus is also analogous to Loki and to the Coyote in Native American culture and
even to Hermes within the Olympian pantheon insofar as he's a trickster figure, the god
of machination.
And there's a way in which, and I think Heidegger has this very right, if you look at the phenomenon
of technological science historically, you can see technological science itself as a
kind of trickery or machination, a cunning or contrivance that involves various kinds
of duplicity and deception.
But it's a deception that's motivated by the will to resist a superior power.
It's like, you know, David versus Goliath.
And interestingly, you know, in Ridley Scott's Prometheus prequels to his Alien films, he
names the android who is this Promethean figure David.
So it's the machinations of David against Goliath.
It's using cunning and slyness and stealth in order to outwit, you know, a power that's
superior in terms of brute force.
You also see this as a characteristic of the Promethean.
And then finally, there's, you know, as I mentioned earlier, the willingness to sacrifice
oneself for the sake of humanity, this kind of ultra humanism and altruism that we see
in Prometheus being willing to be bound in the Caucasus and, you know, suffer a fate
worse than death by, you know, having his liver torn out and regenerated every night
and pecked out again the next day by Zeus's eagle.
So the will to self sacrifice and ultimately martyrdom, you know, an idea that's very
significant in Persian culture, in our shared Persian culture, Shahadat, is also one key
element or facet of the Prometheus archetype.
So these seven, I would say, aspects of the Promethean ethos can be the basis for generating
the architecture, the architectonic of a new socio-political worldview.
Which is centralized in nature, right?
Because there is a point of alignment that these are the ideals that we are striving
for.
Yes.
So, yeah, please.
It's a point of orientation.
So I'm not a fan of democracy.
And every day I'm kind of proven right to myself that democracy is not a way forward.
And it seems like beyond this period that where we're going with respect to U.S. socio-political
gridlock right now, there is going to be something that is going to be somehow centralized.
That some kind of an authority is going to determine the direction, is going to be the
arbiter of meanings of all these terms that we are saying bravery.
Who is there to define bravery, right?
So how do you see we're moving forward here in the United States in the coming decade
from the Prometheus kind of a perspective?
And where are we right now with respect to everything that you said?
Because obviously these are all the quote-unquote good qualities that humanity should consider.
But we seem to have the kind of the problem that artificial intelligence right now has,
which is the alignment problem.
There is no point of, there is no goal, there is no objective for the entire humanity as
a civilization to move towards.
I agree with you entirely.
See, the problem is the United States of America was never intended to be a democracy.
That's right.
And if you go back and you read the writings of the founding fathers, whether it's James
Madison or Benjamin Franklin or Alexander Hamilton, these men loathed democracy.
They thought it was the most vile and incompetent form of government in history, okay?
And what they were actually trying to do, they considered democracy a quote, tyranny
of the majority, unquote.
And what they were actually trying to do was to protect the individual against the mob.
Which is the entire purpose of United States, basically.
That's the entire purpose of the United States, okay?
The rights that are enshrined in the Constitution of the United States, in the Bill of Rights,
and even more fundamentally, the rights that are the opening words of the true Constitution
of the United States, namely the Declaration of Independence, right, life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness.
These rights are rights belonging to the individual that are sacrosanct and to be protected against
the will of the majority.
The system was supposed to be such that even a 95%, you know, or 99% majority of people
in society cannot strip you of certain basic rights that are, quote unquote, God-given,
not in the sense that they have anything to do with the biblical revelation.
And if anyone thinks that, they should read Thomas Paine, read The Rights of Man or The
Age of Reason, you know, the writings of the neglected founding father of the U.S., whose
only sin was that he said publicly what the rest of them thought privately, right?
So the God-giveness of these rights has to do with this deist metaphysics where the human
mind is a microcosm of the cosmic order.
And so, you know, for us to be able to flourish and to expand out into the cosmos and fulfill
our human potential, we need to have a sociopolitical system that allows us to develop the reason
within us that reflects the macrocosmic order, the microcosm in which the cosmic order is
reflected in an embryonic form.
I mean, that was the way of thinking of the founding fathers, which is very much more
in line with kind of Promethean archetype than it is with anything in the revealed religions.
In any case, if you read Carl Schmitt, whose preeminent student, Leo Strauss, wound up
being a very influential political philosophy professor at the University of Chicago, if
you read Carl Schmitt in his writings on the concept of the political, the crisis of parliamentary
democracy, you see how liberals only made an alliance with Democrats because they were
both against the monarchy in the 1700s.
You had two very distinct schools of political thought, Democrats in the vein of Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, people who wanted to bring back democracy in some sense.
And you had liberals like John Stuart Mill.
And these two political tendencies were actually very much opposed to one another and stood
in very serious tension with one another.
But they made this kind of provisional alliance in order to defeat monarchy and to transform
feudal society into the kind of society based on free enterprise that we've had since then.
And so they created this hodgepodge liberal democracy.
This is a fundamentally incoherent ideology, liberal democracy, because the whole point
of liberal liberalism in the classical sense, not this crap that passes for liberalism today,
but the whole point of advocating for political liberty is to protect the rights of the individual.
Whereas a democracy inherently is based on the idea of majority rule.
And the other thing about democracy that most people don't understand is that when you look
at the really sophisticated theorists of democracy in the modern age, like Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
you see that they knew that democracy going all the way back to the classical Greeks is
always based on an implicit acceptance of a certain religious ideology.
You cannot have coherent decision making by a majority in a parliament or in a congress
unless they all believe in the same religion.
And this is something that hasn't been understood that democracy, I wrote about this at length
in World State of Emergency.
Democracy is inherently theocratic.
It doesn't have to be a literal theocracy like the Islamic Republic of Iran, but there
needs to be a tacit acceptance of a certain religious ethos so that you have coherent
long-term decision making in the polity.
A point of alignment.
And so then what happens to the minority of dissenters in a society, those individuals
who don't subscribe to the dominant religion?
Well, they get persecuted.
They get persecuted and ultimately, like Socrates, executed by a democratic assembly.
And so liberalism and democracy were strange bedfellows to begin with.
And I think what we're seeing right now in the United States is the disintegration and
collapse of liberal democracy.
And what we need to do is think about what kind of ideology ought to replace liberal
democracy and what I would like to see is a kind of political ideology where liberty
is central to the system that's proposed to replace the current system.
And the emphasis should therefore be placed on the liberal aspect of the American founding
ideology rather than on its democratic aspect.
And so we need assuring up of the rights of the individual, but that also cannot happen
without acknowledging some kind of point of orientation, which will not tyrannize over
society the way that the Democrats' acceptance of a theology, tacit acceptance of a theology
would tyrannize overall members of society, but it would be a kind of spiritual ethos
that actually protects differentiation and individuation and encourages the cultivation
and flourishing of the individual, a kind of supra religion or transcendent spirituality
which accommodates religious diversity within certain bounds.
You cannot allow religions to thrive in a society which are inherently intolerant religions.
I mean, this idea that freedom of religion extends to people who believe in religions
so dogmatic that they believe in executing those who are, you know, kofars or apostates
or whatever, that kind of freedom of religion is fundamentally incoherent.
It's the Achilles heel that's going to be the downfall of any political system.
And so it needs to be understood that, yes, there should be, you know, people should explore
spirituality in ways that are individualistic, that, you know, promote dynamism and diversity
in society, but that cannot extend to sects or cults that are in favor of forcing a certain
religious ideology onto society and persecuting or even executing people who are considered
apostates.
So when it comes to Islam, that poses a very significant problem for us, you know, in terms
of how we're going to restructure, say, the political system of the United States and
ultimately provide a model for the whole world.
It's a problem for us considering that, demographically speaking, Islam will be the dominant religion
on this planet within the next 30 years.
So this is really interesting.
First of all, about nonsensical terms, Islamic Republic is another one of those nonsensical
terms that we have been dealing with in Iran.
And I talked about this many times in this podcast that before the success of a revolution,
there was an alliance between Marxists and leftists and Islamists around their common
enemy that was this capitalism and America and Shah.
I actually still have this book right here, Answer to History, that he talks about it.
He goes on and on and on.
And it's really interesting how he talks about students in universities, how they don't understand
anything about life and everything has been given to them.
And it's like, you know, we're going through a twilight zone because it's the exact same
thing that is happening in the United States right now, which suggests to me this goes
much deeper into human nature rather than being the outcome of any socio-political,
modern socio-political system.
Yeah, people don't want freedom.
People are terrified of freedom.
I mean, by people, I mean what Heidegger called Das Mann, the majority, the mass, the mob.
They don't want freedom.
Because they want security.
Is that it?
They want security.
Right.
They want just like, you know, physical security, the kind of security of, you know, whatever.
That's going to be guaranteed by a political regime, economic security in terms of social
welfare.
Most fundamentally, they want psychological security.
They want, you know, some kind of a belief system that will give them a sense of tranquility
and, you know, you know, it kind of, you know, inner calm and stability.
People generally do not want to constantly be challenged to expand their horizons.
And so, you know, the burden, burdensome task that is placed on our shoulders is how to
develop a socio-political system that's Promethean in nature when the majority of society is
very threatened by that, where the majority of society wants, you know, a kind of dogma
that you find in, you know, Christian evangelical interpretations of the Bible or Catholic traditionalist
interpretations of the Bible, where the majority of society might even feel more comfortable
with the kind of Confucian values that China wants to promote on a planetary scale than
they would feel with a, you know, Promethean socio-political vision.
So it's a problem.
It's a serious problem that we're going to face in terms of, you know, how to govern
a population that is really terrified of freedom and how to salvage the American project, which
was about defending, you know, human freedom.
But I think, really, we're in the eleventh hour right now, I mean, because we are coming
up against a moment that, you know, I think you can legitimately characterize as the end
of history, a kind of spike on the, you know, exponentially...
Human history, though, right?
Human history.
Yeah.
The end of human history and potentially the beginning of a post-human history, right?
We're approaching a moment when we're going to pass through some kind of a great filter.
And I want to make sure that we do get to that moment, that there is no artificial controlled
demolition of advanced industrial society and a kind of forced return to a neo-agrarian,
neo-feudal way of life and an imposition of traditional values, whether they're in the
form of Catholic traditionalism or whether it's Confucianist traditionalism or some kind
of global Islamic caliphate.
I want to make sure that we make it to the technological singularity and that the people
who pass through that great filter are the people who are actually interested in being
free and in cultivating themselves to the maximum.
So on Islam, I had this conversation with someone from The Federalist that I don't understand
how Islam is not in contradiction to the United States Constitution.
I understand it's a controversial thing to say, but the First Amendment, freedom of religion
and separation of church and state that comes with it is not at all consistent with a religion
that demands submission.
Islam means to submit.
Muslim is the one who has submitted.
So it's a very valid question to ask if a practicing Muslim ends up in the Congress,
whether or not you're loyal to Islam or you're loyal to United States of America.
Practicing Muslims have no place in the United States of America, period, let alone in the
United States Congress.
I analyzed this in an essay called A Critique of Shiite Esotericism, A Critique of Shiite
Esotericism.
In my book, my anthology Lovers of Sophia, one of the essays in there, looks at the kind
of Shiite Esotericism that's supposedly the basis for the Islamic Republic that Ayatollah
Khomeini specialized in in his seminary years and so forth.
And it shows how this is not really authentic Islam.
And you know, this kind of Shiite Esotericism is not even authentic Shiaism of the Arab
kind that, you know, originated in Iraq during the time of, you know, after the martyrdom
of Hussein and so forth.
Shiite Esotericism is a kind of crypto-Zoroastrianism or crypto-mythraism.
And if you actually look at the Qur'an in detail, you see that it includes an entire
political constitution.
It is not just a religious text, the Qur'an is actually a political constitution which
was used to govern Medina in Muhammad's lifetime.
And there's nothing about, you know, the power struggle between, you know, Ali, you know,
Hassan and Hussein on the one hand and the Sunni caliphs on the other hand that would
suggest in any way that the Sharia which is proposed, not proposed, the Sharia which is
mandated in the Qur'an itself would in any way be abrogated by fatwas of ayatollahs or
subsequent interpretations by mystics or anything of the kind.
The transformation of Islam in that direction within the Persianate world was an attempt
by Persians to preserve their own pre-Islamic mysticism.
And you know, it was so effective within Iran and, you know, in sort of catalyzing the so-called
Islamic golden age that a lot of Western intellectuals have been mesmerized by this and confused into
thinking that this is actually Islam.
If you look at, you know, what is in the Qur'an, it's clear and people, I really refer to that
essay where I quote chapter and verse to just make this crystal clear.
Within the Qur'an, you are not allowed to disbelieve in Islam once you are born into
the Islamic community and believing in Islam is not just a testimony of faith, it is adherence
to a political code, a doctrine of jurisprudence that includes things like, you know, draconian
punishments for theft, the institutionalization of women's inferiority in society, all kinds
of property laws.
Yeah.
ISIS.
Yeah.
Yeah.
What was that?
ISIS.
Almost everything that ISIS practiced in Iraq or that the Taliban practiced in Afghanistan
is based right in the Qur'an itself and the Sharia law code that was promulgated by Muhammad
in his lifetime and used to govern Medina.
This is a fact.
And so again, to go back to what I was saying earlier, it's incoherent to understand freedom
of religion as a right that would include toleration and acceptance of people who are
fundamentally intolerant and want to strip everybody else of their freedom of religion.
This makes no sense whatsoever.
Now, I would say this is also true of certain like Judeo-Christian sects that are, you know,
firmly grounded in the Old Testament and that, you know, believe in using, I don't know,
the Book of Leviticus or Exodus or something to develop a quote unquote biblical republic.
Those people shouldn't be tolerated.
Neither.
But demographically speaking, they're a lot less of a threat than Muslims are.
And the Bible as a text is fundamentally different from the Qur'an insofar as it was composed
by tens of different authors over the course of hundreds of years and includes many internal
contradictions as a result of that.
The Qur'an is much more like, you know, Mao's little red book.
It is a doctrinal document produced by one man with one vision at a particular time.
And yet he very clearly mandated that that vision be immutable and eternally applicable,
at least until, you know, the apocalypse.
So yeah, you're absolutely right that Islam in its authentic form doesn't belong in American
society, let alone that Muslims should be serving in the United States Congress and
taking their oath of office on the Qur'an.
It's absolutely preposterous and it's a fundamental threat to the republic.
It really is.
Ayaan Hirsi Ali said, the tolerance of intolerance is cowardice.
That's exactly what it is.
But Peter Boghossian was talking about there is a move in Jiu-Jitsu that it's like this,
that you hold on to your one arm that the other one can be.
And he said that this one, I'm sorry, this one is the far left, is a progressive left
that is hold on to the Islamists and the fundamentalists.
For as long as this stays here, nothing can be done here.
So it seems like, again, we're going back to this progressive left, the end of which
is centralized system of tyranny and new feudalism with Chinese Communist Party at the top.
It seems like it.
That's exactly right.
And, you know, this kind of deracinated identity politics is being used to promote that agenda,
which is one of the reasons why from the beginning of my involvement in the alt-right, I was
trying to take it away from identity politics in this kind of really narrow minded ghettoized
sense and toward a grand vision of, you know, Indo-European shared destiny and a kind of,
you know, ethos that would be able to orient all of humanity in a way that allows us to
successfully navigate the technological singularity.
Are you familiar with Aubrey de Grey?
The gerontologist.
He has a very long beard and long hair.
He is the founder of Sense Foundation.
They're working on longevity and immortality.
Yeah, it's been years, but I remember looking at some of his, the genetic, the biotechnology
aimed at life extension.
Yes.
Research that he was doing in the early 2000s.
I think the last time that I looked at that stuff was somewhere in the mid 2000s, but
yeah, vaguely.
So the last time he was on Joe Rogan, he said what keeps him awake at night is that we're
five to seven years away from a major breakthrough with respect to longevity after which people
are able to live significantly longer lives.
And that will change everything that will change their philosophy, that will change
their priorities, that will change their expectations.
And he was saying what concerns him the most is that politicians that are policymakers
are not ready, which is a given.
They are not ready, but can that immortality be seen or relative immortality be seen as
this new point of alliance for humanity that goes against the practical practices of it
that you see that people are living beyond 100 and then maybe 150, 200 and many other
advancement will come in the meantime.
But in that also addresses problem with religions that everything that is being determined and
arbitrated on this life is based on some kind of an ideal that you will receive in the next
life because most people don't want to die.
Well, you know, I think it's even more profound than that because look, life extension is
one thing.
And now that you refresh my memory, I do remember, I mean, wasn't Aubrey DeGray involved in
those studies where they increased the lifespan of mice by two or three times, something like
that?
So it's feasible and it is right around the corner.
But I think that, you know, far more profound than any, you know, life extension through
genetic engineering, the effect of see, here's the thing in Prometheism, my recent book Prometheism,
I argue that the technological singularity is inextricable from what I call the spectral
revolution.
So this is the idea that as we get closer to the technological singularity in really
well-funded research programs that are aiming at developing strong artificial intelligence
or even as we try to, you know, develop an even more comprehensive, thorough going mastery
in editing the human genome, we are going to come up against anomalies in these research
programs, anomalies where, you know, as they're attempting to develop strong AI inside quantum
computers, they see instances of psychokinesis, anomalies in genetic engineering research
programs where there are mutations that cannot be accounted for by, you know, the reductive
materialist scientific paradigms that these researchers are doing their work on the basis
of.
They're going to need to, at that point, take into consideration, you know, the many decades
of research that's been done by parapsychologists and the AI research programs and genetic engineering
research programs leading us toward the technological singularity are in effect going to legitimate
the whole history of parapsychological research and bring about what I call the spectral revolution,
which is a scientific revolution in some ways comparable to the Copernican Revolution and
the Darwinian Revolution, but much more profound because at that point, when we acknowledge,
you know, telepathy and other forms of extrasensory perception and psychokinesis and so forth
as legitimate, not just human abilities, but capacities that we see in various organisms
in nature, at that point, we will become conscious for the first time of the way in which scientific
paradigms condition and constrain our thinking.
And then we'll be able to engage in various research programs that are post-paradigmatic.
They can take place unrestricted by any one particular scientific paradigm and use various
theoretical models in order to accomplish different ends in terms of, you know, discovery
and innovation.
And so where I was going with this is that I think that the impact of that kind of spectral
revolution on religion is far more profound than anything you're going to see as a result
of genetic engineering leading to life extension.
It's not just that, you know, people living 300 years or, I don't know, a thousand year
lifespans are going to understand spirituality differently.
They're going to be disabused of various religious dogmas.
Once AI researchers discover that there's a kind of consciousness that's not reducible
to the biological organism and that it can survive physical death and we can track it
as it does and we can potentially guide a soul, for lack of a better word, from one
body into another, potentially into an android body, once those kinds of capabilities are
developed within, you know, well-funded mainstream research programs, it's going to have an absolutely
devastating effect on revealed religion and all kinds of religious dogma.
And this is actually one of the reasons why I worry about the rise of China, because unlike
Westerners who subscribe to, you know, an Abrahamic religious revelation, right?
I mean, Judeo-Christianity, like Islam, is a form of Abrahamic religious revelation.
Unlike Westerners who, you know, have this revealed Bible as the basis of the religious
belief system, the Chinese, you know, Confucian worldview is not going to be as destabilized,
there's not going to be as, you know, severe a sociopolitical upheaval, it will not be
as traumatic for them to process these breakthroughs in scientific research that legitimate ESP
and mind over matter, as it were, and, you know, that potentially present scientific
evidence for reincarnation, it will not be as difficult for them to handle those breakthroughs
as it will be for Westerners, particularly, let's say, evangelicals or traditionalist
Catholics who are going to be traumatized by these discoveries and immediately will
brand the scientific researchers engaged in this kind of endeavor as agents of the Antichrist
who are promulgating black magic and sorcery.
And so we face potentially another crisis like the one that we did during the epoch
of the witch burnings, you know, when Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake during the Renaissance
and so forth.
And that's another of the major concerns that my project of Prometheism is trying to address.
That is a very valid concern because we've already seen the example of that with Google
Glass, how people got attacked in San Francisco and around Silicon Valley, the buses of these
companies were attacked just because of Google Glass, that somebody, actually the president
of the transhumanist party of United States I was talking to, he brought an interesting
angle that the problem with Google Glass was the elitist way that it was released, that
not everybody could have access to it, you had to be chosen, you had to be selected in
order to have, but I think it goes beyond that, exactly what you said, that you use
China as an example, I always use Japan, that you go to a Shinto temple, you come out, you
see the most high tech, high rise, and then you go to a Buddhist temple that has a robot
priest that Japanese people who go to a shrine, they go and talk to that robot and they interact,
they're not kicking it, they're not offended by it, they don't think it's going to take
their jobs away, so that is the biggest uphill it seems like for the West, it's social adoption
of whatever kind of technology and advancement that is going to come because they work as
well as the society that adopts those kind of advances.
And this is one of the reasons why we need Japan and we need India as our close allies
and partners in this global Prometheus project, because like China, who is our primary adversary,
the Japanese and the Indians have a kind of spiritual orientation, non-Muslim Indians
of course, have a kind of spiritual orientation that will be able, will afford them the capability
of navigating these kinds of dramatic breakthroughs more effectively.
And so while I'm advocating an ethos based on the archetype of Prometheus, I certainly
would encourage the spread of Zen Buddhism or Vajrayana Buddhism in the West and a deeper
connection with the Indian branch of the Indo-European world, not to call it a civilization because
it's beyond the concept of civilization, but I would encourage certainly Westerners to
have a deeper appreciation of the various spiritual traditions of India, the various
forms of the Dharma there, as well as the Buddha Dharma that Japan, I think, really
is the greatest protector and defender of in our world today.
So wasn't Iran Renaissance a project to bring the future Iran within this exact alliance
that you're describing?
That was exactly how I saw it.
And so I was working with them and with the alt-right at the same time so that I could
integrate these into a kind of global project.
And at one point, I thought that Iran would maybe be a great place to have a kind of United
Nations of the Indo-European world that, you know, America, you know, and Russia and maybe
even India, Europe as well, they all want to be the center of everything, right?
They all, I mean, they're used to being major world powers in the case of the United States
and Russia superpowers.
And so there would be great contention between America, Russia, maybe even Europe and India
over, you know, being the center, being the heart or the brain of this global Indo-European
order, right?
And so I thought Iran could play a fascinating, mediating role and be a kind of crossroads
and nexus for the entire Indo-European world, including its Buddhist wing.
After all, I think a strong case can be made that actually the origins of Buddhism go back
to Iran.
That's a whole subject in and of itself.
Yeah, well, I've argued that Buddha was actually an Iranian Scythian and that it's not just
that Buddhism was fundamentally shaped by the Iranian colonization of North India under
the Kushans, so that Mahayana Buddhism is an almost entirely Iranian creation.
It's actually the case that, you know, I mean, there's a lot of evidence that Gotama Sakya
Muni was a Saka, that he was a Scythian himself.
This is in my book, Iranian Leviathan, I spend a couple of chapters on that.
So, you know, Iran is also very closely linked.
I mean, you know, there's a reason the Bamiyan Buddhas, the most colossal Buddhas in the
world were in eastern Iran, Afghanistan being a bullshit country.
There's a reason why the most colossal Buddhas in the world were carved in eastern Iran.
Iran was, eastern Iran was, the Mecca of Buddhism for centuries and centuries.
So I thought Iran would be a great place for a kind of, you know, union of Indo-European
nations to coalesce.
But unfortunately, I found in the course of my work with the Persian Renaissance Foundation,
that my colleagues, you know, the leader of that organization, you know, and other high
level members that I was closely involved with, did not have that scope of vision.
And they also were too, in my view, deferential toward, you know, people in the State Department
and various American politicians who I just found, you know, as we say in Persian, chendish,
halvar, you know, hair-raising people, people who are like, you know, give me the creeps,
you know, John Bolton types and so forth, who are associated with, say, Mojahedin al-Khalq,
the MEK, the Islamist Marxist Opposition Group to the Islamic Republic, and various other,
you know, bad actors whose involvement in any change in Iran would, I think, compromise
the country's territorial integrity and allow it to be carved up and looted by various foreign
powers, Israel and others.
So you know, I had a falling out with them over that, unfortunately.
Yeah, I mean, Iranians, the way that you describe all these major countries are going to be
at each other's throats in order to who's going to lead this future world, that's how
it's been within Iranians forever.
You know, we don't have one reliable opposition to this.
I believe it's an occupying regime that is in Iran.
It has nothing to do with Iran and Iranians and the Iranian culture has occupied the country.
But you know, in absence of any kind of a valid opposition, forget about the vision,
because what you portrayed is obviously awesome and is ideal.
The other side of this is Iran just being torn apart as a result of some kind of a civil
war that, you know, it's completely possible in absence of this uber centralized kind of
a theocracy that has been formed in Iran, especially after Khomeini with Khamenei that
he, you know, everything is about him.
He's gone.
It's this vacuum of power, who's going to fill it, which part is going to fall out and
how the other countries surrounding countries and major powers are going to take advantage
of it.
Yeah, I mean, even though I remain in favor of an Iranian Renaissance, you know, as an
idea, I resigned from the Persian Renaissance Foundation, you know, where I was the senior
advisor to the executive committee, I resigned because I came to the conclusion and and you
know, let me say after being involved, like in actual practical, high level lobbying efforts,
let me leave it at that, OK, I became in various discussions with stakeholders in any potential
change in Iran, I became convinced that there was no viable opposition and that if an attempt
were made under the present conditions to overthrow the Islamic Republic, it would lead
to the territorial disintegration of Iran.
We would see a larger Azerbaijan to our north.
We would see, you know, the Iranian part of part of Azerbaijan that remains within Iran
amalgamated to the Republic of Azerbaijan.
We would see an independent Kurdistan.
We would see the majority of Iran's oil resources severed from a rump state of Persia, which
would be economically destitute because it loses the oil of Khuzestan that the Saudis
intend to turn into the Arab Republic of Al Ahwaz.
And then, of course, Baluchistan would become a fortress for Sunni terrorists coming in
from Pakistan.
So it would be an utter catastrophe.
And until someone can convince me, you know, that there is a viable nationalist opposition
that can cohesively govern the country, you know, in the wake of the collapse or overthrow
the Islamic Republic, I remain skeptical of whether it's such a good idea to do that at
this time.
Otherwise, and, you know, I'm not buying into nice words, it doesn't matter who says them.
I think we're way past that.
You know, this idea that like in Africa, I think this is in Nigeria, that they didn't
have landlines and all of a sudden they have cell phones.
It's like this.
There is a certain kind of insight and wisdom in that that, hey, we don't have to catch
up with landlines.
We didn't have them.
That's fine.
Let's catch up with whatever is coming next.
And I hear people, you know, the opposition of Iranians, they're saying we need democracy
in Iran.
Like, oh, my God, like, what are you talking about democracy in the decade that in five
or six years, it will be so easy for anybody to 3D print a weapon and say, this is what
I'm saying.
I don't agree with the majority.
I'm just going to create my own zone that now they're creating all across the United
States as well.
Yeah.
Yeah, I agree with you entirely.
And also, you know, if you're a pro-democracy advocate in an Iranian context, you're a retard
because you don't understand your own culture.
Yeah.
I mean, I mean, it's I get incensed, OK?
If you understand square one about Persian political philosophy and the cultural identity
of Iran, Iran is the bastion of a political thinking that's an alternative to democracy.
Let's put it that way.
I mean, you know, Iran's great value to the wider Indo-European world is to help develop
a coherent, sophisticated alternative to democracy.
That's the kind of resource that our Persian tradition has to offer the wider Indo-European
world.
And the fact that Iran has gone into a democracy is, you know, losing sight of the fundamental
character and the greatest strengths of Persian political thought going all the way back to
Darius.
Yeah, you're absolutely right.
About United States, where we are right now is a weird place.
Some people say that, you know, we're at the edge of a precipice, which is true, absolutely.
But at the same time, you know, everybody talks about the revolution.
Not that many people are talking about the day after the revolution.
So with you having Prometheism and Prometheus movement as the point of alignment for your
perspective, first of all, where do you see United States is right now today and what
steps need to be taken for the US from today until the ideal place in Prometheism or according
to Prometheism perspective that you feel comfortable that this is the direction that we're headed
towards?
Look, I'll be very honest with you.
I mean, this is a this is a question that's setting me up for a very what's going to be
a very controversial answer, but I'm not going to pull any punches.
I'll be very, very straightforward with you.
There are two potential tracks.
One and the one that I prefer, frankly, is that Trump uses every mechanism, every opportunity
open to him to make it clear that this election has not only been frauded, but that there
has been treasonous foreign intervention involved in an attempted theft of this election.
OK, and that the big tech people and the deep state officials, 50 of which had the courtesy
to introduce themselves to us when they signed that letter saying that the Hunter laptop
was a Russian disinfo operation.
This is unbelievable.
The audacity of these 50 former intelligence officials, including five former directors
of the CIA, to sign their names to a piece of paper that alleges that there was this
Russian disinfo operation promoting the Biden laptop story when there's not a shred of evidence
for that.
And it's now since been admitted that Biden is under investigation.
This is actually spectacular because what these people did was they basically gave us
a roster of the members of the deep state in the intelligence community.
We know who they are now.
We know who they are.
And we know that the same big tech people who are screwing around on Twitter and on
Facebook to suppress the New York Post story, to block Donald Trump's tweets despite his
being president of the United States.
We know these big tech people are in bed with China and we know that the Biden family is
in bed with China.
And so I want to see President Trump within the next, what is it now, 20 something days
until January 6th, 30 days or so until the inauguration.
I want to see him use every avenue open to him, beginning with Director of National Intelligence
Radcliffe's assessment of the election, use every avenue open to make sure that he's the
one taking the oath of office on January 20th and continue into his second term.
In that event, there will be a massive violent uprising in all of the blue state cities.
And the president of the United States will be forced to engage in a civil war.
He will become the second president in the history of the United States after Abraham
Lincoln to have to go to war against his own people.
And I don't think it's coincidental at all that he chose a former national counterterrorism
director as his secretary of defense.
Green Beret.
Yeah.
You only do that when you're planning to go to war inside your own country.
That guy doesn't have a qualification to be secretary of defense if you're planning various
foreign endeavors and so on and so forth.
He's focused domestically and it's an anticipation of waging a second civil war.
So I would prefer to see that scenario unfold as bloody and as catastrophic as it may be
for a couple of years until all these people in the deep state are prosecuted and purged
from the system.
That would be much healthier for America.
And then we're going to get the kind of Trump administration that we wanted from the beginning,
one with General Flynn in it, one with Steve Bannon in it.
And this Prometheus vision that I have can then be like right off the bat in a very,
you know, gentle fashion.
It can be, you know, phase by phase introduced into the public political discourse and policies
can be, you know, tailored that are in a way that's inspired by this worldview.
Okay.
And, you know, it won't become immediately explicit, but over time we can, you know,
we can at least inspire policymaking in the second Trump administration in the same way
as the neocons did during the George W. Bush administration, right?
I mean, in the same way that Leo Strauss's political philosophy inspired some of the
policies, detrimental policies of the W. Bush administration, we can in a positive sense
philosophically inspire policies beginning with the second Trump administration.
I think that's the more favorable course as catastrophic as it will be in the near term.
The second possibility is that, you know, Joe Biden will be sworn in on January 20th
and we're headed for a few years of Biden and then potentially a 10 year long Kamala
Harris presidency because I don't see how if they were able, if the deep state was able
to rig this election with Donald Trump in control of the executive branch of government,
now after four years of their total control of the government, Trump or anyone else opposed
to the deep state will be able to prevail in the 2024 election.
I just don't see it.
So I think we're headed for a very long term struggle.
And then I think, you know, we would have to kind of retreat within ourselves for a
certain period of time, develop a very, you know, sophisticated, coherent, complex, not
only political ideology, but a program and also develop an alternative platform for communication
and organization because they're going to close all the doors of social media to us
within those four years.
The crackdown on Twitter and Facebook and so forth and YouTube where you can't even
discuss the election fraud anymore are going to become much worse.
And it will be imperative for the right to develop an independent tech platform and network.
And we're then engaged in a long term struggle that will not afford us another opportunity
for direct intervention until probably about 2032.
And unfortunately, if that happens, if that's the track we wind up on, when the change takes
place, it will be far more violent and vicious than it would be in 2020, in 2021 rather.
I absolutely agree with you.
I mean, this is not a normal kind of a situation.
This is not a political conflict.
This is really a philosophical and the conflict of meaning.
What is the purpose of us living in this country?
And you know, what's the purpose of this country?
Just be the country.
You know, where are we headed?
So most people don't know and even less people know about what we talked about with respect
to technology.
I'm very happy that you're on the right.
And I'm very happy that you said you actually it was a point to make this connection with
Steve Bannon inside White House because I'm not hearing it from anybody else on the right.
But what I'm hearing is unbelievable backlash towards transhumanism that I'm saying, hey,
I agree with you if the transhumanism is controlled by a centralized entity like the Chinese Communist
Party.
But transhumanism, it really is a civil right issue of our time that if somebody wants to
merge and go beyond our biological boundaries, it's no one's business to tell that person
that you're not allowed to experiment with your own body or you're not allowed to experiment
with joining this kind of a network or developing this kind of a system that could threaten
us.
But you know, we're headed towards, as you said, very who knows, who knows, but conflict
is something that is definitely going to be guaranteed because, you know, we are redefining
meanings and the fundamentals of our civilization that we have taken for granted for many, many,
many centuries.
Yeah.
You know, and in terms of transhumanism, it's not as if the federal government of the United
States needs to adopt some kind of a uniform policy with respect to, you know, the potentials
of biotechnology or, you know, cybernetic enhancement.
The United States is the nation that could potentially emerge as the leader in terms
of, you know, transhuman evolution of humanity precisely because of the scope of liberty
that's left to the individual within states that are allowed to determine their own policies.
You know, the United States Constitution with the liberty that it grants to various states
to develop their own policies with respect to, you know, public health and technology
is, you know, potentially the country that could advance most rapidly in terms of these
technological developments.
I mean, you know, I draw another analogy that is going to get me into trouble, but the fact
of the matter is that in the 1920s, the United States was the world's leader in eugenics.
The Germans copied the Americans in terms of eugenics.
And I'm certainly not in favor of compulsory sterilization or any kind of old school eugenics.
You know, the whole point of contemporary emerging biotechnologies is that, you know,
they are enhancements that, you know, one can opt in or out of on an individual basis,
right?
I mean, there's no reason why these kinds of genetic modifications should be compulsory
or there should be some top down federal approach to them.
But if we simply leave it in the hands of the states, the way that the federal government
left eugenics in the hands of the states in the 1920s and 30s, you'll get all kinds of
different policies in different places and people who want to benefit from these kinds
of technologies will move to, I don't know, Nevada, you know, Colorado, wherever, you
know, that have more liberal policies in that respect.
And so that's all that needs to be done.
We just need to make sure that on a federal level, there's no ban on these technologies
in the way that there is going to be in Germany or other parts of Europe.
Yeah.
Away from concentration of power because power corrupts absolute power crops.
Absolutely.
Yeah, we don't want the Chinese approach where there's going to be state mandated genetic
engineering potentially, you know, with deleterious consequences on a population wide basis.
But we also don't want a state mandated ban on various uses of these technologies.
If it's if it's done constitutionally with proper respect for states rights and for the
rights of the individual, then, you know, the United States could even leap ahead of
China in terms of, you know, seizing the potential of these technologies.
I totally agree.
I mean, the possibilities are so in contrast to each other.
It's insane that we're at this point in history.
The book is called Prometheism by Jason Reza Georgiani.
This was such a pleasure having you on the podcast.
What's next for you?
And where can people our audience follow?
I will add all the links to your website and the books and everything when the episode
is released.
But where can our audience follow your work?
Well, my website is Jason Reza Georgiani dot com, Jason Reza Georgiani dot com.
And it has links to all of my books, to my videos.
You know, I've done tens and tens of interviews that are linked there as well as to my social
media.
That's all linked at my website.
And, you know, my latest book after Prometheism is this novel which just came out.
It's a sci fi horror novel and my first work of fiction.
And I think your audience in particular would probably find this at least as interesting
as Prometheism.
Amazing.
Thank you so much for introducing us to your new book and congratulations.
Let me ask you.
You're welcome.
Yeah, absolutely.
Let me ask you the last question.
I ask all my guests that if you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization,
what would you say is the worst thing humanity has done and what would you say is our greatest
achievement?
Oh, man, that is profound.
The worst thing that humanity has done, the worst thing that humanity has done, my God,
we've done so many awful things.
But all of the awful things that we've done have been an expression of our willingness
to sacrifice freedom for security.
And I would say the worst thing that humanity has done is to misunderstand its fundamental
nature.
I think that what defines the human being as opposed to various organisms in nature
that have a kind of species being, you know, what Aristotle called the species being, certain
characteristics that are hardwired into them by their biology, what distinguishes humanity
is the abyss of existential freedom and the demand on us to define our own character,
to shape our own character and to define our own destiny from out of the way that we've
shaped our character.
And I think it's precisely because we are so free on an existential level that we are
constantly enslaving ourselves in various ways.
Since we are a species that is not hardwired in any particular way, we compensate with
all these rigid ideologies.
And it's not at all clear that that would be the case with various intelligent extraterrestrials.
There may be intelligent extraterrestrials that are more like a beehive or termite colony
than they are like us.
They may actually be hardwired in certain ways despite their capacity to develop advanced
technology.
And so what I would say to them is that, look, I mean, if let's say I come across a representative
of a hive-minded species, a kind of borg, I would say to them, look, our greatest sin
is that we sacrifice the freedom that we had and that you don't.
We gave up on the gift, the natural gift that we were given of the freedom to define ourselves
and to be the masters of our own destiny.
We squandered what it is that you people never even had in the first place to make ourselves
more like you.
That's probably what I would say.
And in terms of our greatest achievement, humanity's greatest achievement, I mean, it
would be the same answer taken positively rather than negatively.
It would be all of those moments in history when beginning with Cyrus the Great and Zarathustra
and ending with Philip K. Dick and Jackson Pollock, all of those moments in history where
we explored our existential freedom to the maximum and we produced just stunning works
of innovative creative genius and basically redefined the limits of the possible.
And I think that, in fact, in any potential encounter with extraterrestrial intelligence,
that will be our greatest strength.
Our scientists, our engineers will have nothing to teach those people.
It's our artists, our philosophers, our writers, our musicians that will have something to
offer in any encounter between humanity and an extraterrestrial intelligence.
And so maximizing the conditions for creative freedom, I think, is a priority in terms of
any imminent encounter with an extraterrestrial intelligence, because it's in that event that
we will have the most to offer to them.
