What I really am most interested in though is how you take technology and how you apply it to
who we are as human beings. How do you take what we can do physically and emotionally and transfer
that into the possibility of making expressive music.
Hello and welcome to the 35th episode of Neo Human Podcast. I'm a Ghabhari agologist on Twitter and
Instagram and you can follow the show on liveinlimbo.com, iTunes and YouTube.
With me today, I have the pleasure of having Jordan Rudis. Welcome to Neo Human Podcast, Jordan.
Thank you. You've been involved in music in one way or another since the 60s. How music has evolved
since then and would it be fair to say that technology has had a direct role in the evolution
of the music itself? Absolutely. I mean, I grew up personally as a trained concert pianist. I was
being groomed to be a concert pianist and, you know, when I was 17 or 18, I started to discover
all about synthesizers and I just watched so many changes. But I would say the main change with
technology and the way that the music has changed is that there was this old argument in the early
days of synthesis where people were saying that there's just not the ability to be expressive or
shall we say organic with sound. And now I think that it's impossible, unless you're completely
blind and live in the dark, it's impossible to make that argument because the capabilities of
making music using technology have brought it to a point where the instruments are so sensitive,
so organic. An example being, you know, like the instrument called the seaboard that I worked on
the last few years. It's a very expressive new kind of instrument. So yeah, so I think that that
has brought a lot of changes about and also, you know, the ability to just, you know, continue this
kind of sonic exploration, which is possible through the advancement of synthesis itself,
being able to not only make different kinds of sounds, but also to be able to play with sounds
in the spatial domain have changed things up a lot as well. So would it be fair to say that in music,
as well as everywhere else in our life that we see today, the line between digital and analog is
becoming more and more blurry? Yeah, I would say that. I'd definitely say that because the fluidity
of control has gotten so great that you kind of you definitely lose that kind of
the feeling that you're, you know, working in steps, and it rather feels more, you know,
closer to like the human spirit and what people think of as analog. Yeah. We talk a lot about
how automation is affecting industries across the board with the assumption that creative fields
are more difficult to automate. However, we have seen that through machine learning, AIs have
composed songs, written novels and screenplays. We've seen the hologram Hatsune Miku becoming
number one pop star in Japan and music composed by Squarepusher performed entirely by the Japanese
robots, Banshee machines. How do you see technology affecting music and musicians themselves going
forward? Well, I think I see all different types of technology. You know, it's a world where every
day we wake up and there's something else amazing that we hear about, you know, whether it's a machine
playing an instrument or some kind of a piece that was written by a computer and less, you know, and
well, less and less human involvement, or maybe some technologies where there are where there is,
you know, some kind of participation or interaction and some that are not. But I guess
what I care about what I'm I like, you know, I'm into gadgets. I like all technology. I think it's,
you know, it's cool for a robot to play a musical instrument. What I really am most interested in,
though, is how you take technology and how you apply it to who we are as human beings.
How do you take what we can do physically and emotionally and transfer that into the possibility
of making expressive music? So, you know, growing up on the piano, the piano is a very beautiful
instrument. But it's, you know, there's a point where you can say, OK, well, you can only do so
much because once your finger, it's once your finger presses down on a key, the hammer hits
the string and the sound is in the air. And then you're controlling the sound in a way, but you're
not involved with the sound at every moment. An example of an instrument, an older instrument that
that has, you know, a great level of control would be something like a violin or even a wind
instrument where you're, you know, we're in charge of the note at every given second, the dynamics,
the pitch. But the more control you have at every moment, I think the better. And I'm excited about
technology that really allows us to express and gives us more control of making the music. But
not only that, but maybe things that give us more information as well. So as you're playing,
you can actually see or feel what's going on to help kind of bring the performance to a higher
level. These are the kind of things that I spend a lot of time thinking about, like when I released
my first application with my wisdom music company and we produced MorphWiz, although now you go back
and it's a pretty simple application. The concept of it was very strong, which was that I wanted to
give the user a way to work with sound and morph between waveforms, but not only sonic waveforms,
but also visual waveforms and have a large area to express that. So you're hearing the sound,
you're seeing it, you're getting the information, there's even an entertainment aspect to it,
but putting those all together is a good, that kind of thinking, I think is a good step towards
what technology ideally could do for creative people, musicians.
Yeah, absolutely. I was going to ask you about wisdom music. What inspired you to start it when
you did? Because you started it quite early on, I would say maybe, was it 2009?
Yeah, it was about eight years ago. It was when the first iPhones were being put out.
What got me into it was that I had tried one of the very, very first iPhones and I thought,
even though I was playing on a very primitive little piano that somebody put on the screen,
like a one octave kind of thing, I had this feeling that on a multi-touch surface that more
could be done. And there's actually a pretty funny story, which is that around that time,
my wife and I had just purchased a beautiful nine foot Steinway grand for my, I think that's like
for my 50th birthday at that point. And instead of playing the piano a lot, I would sit around and
just make this ridiculous sound on my new Apple device. And she looked at me one day and said,
why are you making that horrible sound on that thing? And I was like, no, no, no, I have an idea.
I really have an idea here. Leave me alone. I got something in mind. So it was maybe one of the
few times that I was right. And I did have some pretty cool idea about a way to think about using
a multi-touch surface to make music. And then later on I produced MorphWiz. So my desire was
to really take these multi-touch surfaces and figure out how to make music with them. What
the best way to do that would be. And I realized that by being able to have control of a whole
playing surface or whole area like that, that each finger could kind of have an individual
identity and have room to express. And so that's kind of one of the driving
courses in what I do with the music. I think cost is also a very important factor
because I remember when I was a kid, we couldn't afford the piano. We ended up with
one of the CT models that was like tenth of a price. So it's becoming more available to more
people. They can make more music. And I think I used to have a VL tone. I think that was an
inspiration to me as well. It was a Casio model that did some pretty cool things. But yeah,
I think this generation, it's amazing to think that what they carry around in their pockets,
whether it's an iOS device or an Android device or Windows, whatever, you can do things on these
little devices we walk around with. But you just can't do almost every product that you'd find in
a music store. As far as what kind of visuals you might see on your device when you're making
the music or some kind of multi-touch expression that you can do by playing a note and moving your
finger on it and changing the sonic parameters while you're holding the note. I mean, it's
incredible. It's almost like we're playing catch up now in the hardware world to bring it up to
speed with what people expect from the little apps that they can buy on their iOS device.
And not only that, I think that the young musicians, people who are really interested
in music that want to get into music, I think that instead of maybe going to a guitar center
or something like that, they can go to the Apple app store and get a GeoShred or some other app
that lets them into a pretty deep world of music for very few dollars. Yeah, that completely new
approach. They're talking about how malls are going out of business in the US. Do you think
the same thing will happen to music stores? I think that we've seen it happening,
unfortunately, because I like music stores and I like record stores. I miss them when they change.
But I really do think that there's going to be a big movement, and there already is,
towards people realizing that they can get really great instruments on their iPad.
So what does that mean? I don't know. We have to figure out what that all means and how to make
it work. But that's what I think is happening. You said in 2014 that streaming music services
won't allow creative musicians to survive. Do you still think like that? Would you expand on that?
I think that there's a big problem there. I think that everybody's trying to count on streaming music
as a way that musicians will hopefully be able to stay alive. Because there's so many services
now and that's where things are going and people aren't buying CDs anymore. It's almost like a
desperation thought that that's what's going to be happening. Personally, I'm putting my time into
other kinds of ideas. I'm about to launch, as an example, a new platform called ArtistCo,
A-R-T-I-S-T-C-O, in about two weeks. And it's a system that is based on artists supporting each
other. Fans, die-hard fans supporting the artist. It's very much kind of an affiliate type of an
idea. But just to give you an example of the way that it could work is if you're an artist and
you're over in China with a million followers and I'm Jordan Rudis here. Well, right now I'm in
Munich, but let's say I'm at home in the US. I would then post a link that says, please check out
Zhao Yitong's music in China and everybody who follows that link would go to his ArtistCo site
and when they sign up for it, then I would get a small percentage of the sign up fee. So it's about
artists supporting each other and really turning on the fan bases to each other's music and gaining
support and financial support from that kind of a mechanism. So that's the kind of thing that I
think has a lot of possibility for the future where the artist goes directly to the fan. It's
very much the kind of independent artist thinking that there's a bunch of artists that are leaning
towards that where you kind of get rid of the middle man and you do it yourself. And that
doesn't necessarily, that doesn't really involve the streaming services. It involves more allowing
fans to have access to an area where you put your material. Is it only on the distribution side or
do you also, let's say Jordan Rudis has a part and some drummer in Mongolia adds something cool to
it and Jordan Rudis and the Mongolian drummer end up making the music together? This particular
service at this point, at least when it's released, will not be, it's not a service that allows like
jamming together. It's not about that. It's more about releasing music, things maybe you've never
heard before or things you have heard before, even if it's educational materials or it could be
videos. So it's more about distributing the art rather than it's about collaborating.
Right. Streaming in a way itself seems to have emerged as an alternative to and as a solution
for pirating, but then it created a whole bunch of new challenges on its own. What do you think can
be a good replacement for streaming services, if anything, or do we need to shift our attention to
a completely different form than streaming? Well, as somebody who loves music, I mean, first of all,
I can really appreciate the idea of streaming. I think it's good. I just think the biggest problem
with it is monetization of the artist. There's just no real money to speak of that's going to
the artist to keep the artists alive. So that's the reason that I'm investing time and resources
into like ArtistCo, because I think it's a way that artists can actually stay alive. I think
that's crucial. I mean, as a listener, I think, okay, well, Spotify or the Apple Music system,
those are really, really great things. The Pandora system, the new premium is great. It's all good
from a listener's point of view, but how much money is the artist going to make? And can they
really continue to do their art form with that kind of service? I don't think so. I think it's
really got to change. Right. It seems to be the culture of consumers and music listeners also
need to change to realize that it's true that you can't get a piece of music for free, but
if you want that artist that you like to continue making music, you need to pay for it. That's
right. Yeah, it's a cultural thing where everybody thinks they can get everything for free. And it's
very difficult. I mean, it's difficult to a point, but then it's even more difficult beyond that.
And one example is even on my own, like I love to be in my piano room at home, but it's
piano room at home and say, oh, I feel like improvising. And then I can just turn on my
iPhone and point it to the piano and go hit Facebook live. And the next thing you know,
I'm playing for a few thousand people around the world on a moment's notice. And it's really nice.
But there's the side of that that's not so great, which is that, yes, it's great as a fan. You can
tune in, you can listen to me play, but there's no financial interest in that. So I'm just
basically, not only am I giving it away, but I'm saying here, here's some more music for free.
Right. And you've always jumped in right into anything new. I remember watching you at Stageit
platform. You've been so innovative. And I think that's one of the problems that a lot of musicians
have that they just ignore all this digital and new advancement. I'm like, well, this is not natural.
This is not real music. Yeah. I think it's really important to pay attention to all those kinds of
developments and be conscious of it because not only do I think it's fun, but I think it's
important to understand where it's going and how each musician can kind of contribute to where it
should be going. Right. So do you think that's the constant reformation in music as a result
of technology calls for constant reformation in the music industry and the music and musicianship
itself? Yeah, I think that, well, you know, a lot of this, a lot of the industry is just kind of
blinded at this point by a incredible desire to, to, to maintain, you know, what they have or
necessity. The business. Yeah. They just need to do whatever they can to stay employed and keep it
alive. And, and as far as the musicians go, a lot of, you know, most musicians out there don't even
don't understand what's, uh, you know, what the new world is all about. They live in a space where
they're kind of thinking that, you know, it should be like what used to be happening. One of the
challenges is that, um, you know, many of the musician friends that I have that I grew up with
don't get this kind of, um, idea that the musician is going to be so close with the fans and like
where the fan can actually have access to them. They feel like this got to be the separation.
And so it creates a real roadblock to kind of, uh, allowing the new technologies to work for them.
That's a very good point. And to even, and to even be part of figuring out how and where we should be
moving to, because, you know, as soon as a fan gets close, they go, Oh, this doesn't, this is not
right. They're supposed to be at a distance and I'm supposed to be up here on a, you know, on a
throne or something like that. And that's what creates the celebrity magic. Well, I mean, things,
you know, move very fast and unfortunately that's not the way that business works, that the music
business works and that's not what the fans want. And, uh, we have to, we have to start, you know,
as a culture, kind of embracing this new way of thinking. Some of us are more comfortable with
that and some of us are just not, you know, but I think that, uh, you know, I watch musician friends
every day kind of go, Oh, wow. Oh, I see. Yeah. Okay. And step by step, they're being kind of
almost led into this new direction. And, you know, and those who are smart, they're open,
we'll get it. And others will just close down and, you know, and they'll be kind of left behind.
Yeah. That's a very good point. Let's talk a little bit, uh, a little bit about music. What
is improvisation? Because I know you, um, you think of improvising, the ability to improvise
is a very important factor, uh, to have as a musician. What is improvisation? Who is an
improviser and how can an improviser improve his improvisational skill? Uh, it's a really good
question. Um, improvisation, first of all, is something that is very, very important to me.
It's something that I've always done even through all my years. Uh, at Julliard, I would be, I guess,
a closet improviser, if you will, because it wasn't so much allowed in those, uh, in the
Julliard, you know, halls. Um, but to me, the art of improvisation is, it's, it's like speaking a
language. It's, it's very much speaking the language of music. Um, and what it means to me
is that like, just personally, I could sit down with the piano and just start playing stuff that
you've never heard before and do it, you know, for as long as I was sitting down with the piano,
whether it's good or not, or whether it flows smoothly or not, there's different factors that
that depends on things like, am I feeling relaxed? Am I, do I have other things on my mind? Um, you
know, all kinds of things can get in the way, mental clutter, but generally it's, I very much
think of it as a lot like speaking a language. Um, an example being, if I was feeling, uh,
especially emotional about something, that's a great time for me to sit at the piano and express
that with music. And what makes that possible to even improvise, to make up stuff on the spot,
is to have tools to do that. Like when you learn a language, you learn words, you learn to connect
words and make sentences to express in their phrases. Well, in music, you need, you need to
connect notes together. You need to connect harmony together. You need to know that, you know,
these certain kinds of chords, if you put them together, they will express a certain feeling
or create a certain kind of vibe. If you're not familiar with any of those harmonic melodic tools,
any of the rhythmic tools, then you're not going to be able to speak the language.
First of all, if you don't like, uh, if you don't know any kind of theory and, or if you don't have
a good ear for music, you can't hear what a harmonic change is going to sound like in your head
before you hit the note. Your chance of speaking the language, uh, is very limited. However,
if you have some skill, some theoretical skill, and maybe even above that, if you have a good
ear for music, meaning you can hear the notes in your head before your hand touches the instrument,
then you can understand how to communicate that way because you can start putting things together.
So it's very much about developing tools, maybe, you know, even if it's practicing scales or
arpeggios or chord patterns in different keys so that when you do sit down, you can express and
you can play in a style. You know, if somebody, one of the challenges, one of the things I like
to try to do, and sometimes I'm more successful than other times, but one of the things if somebody
says, well, Jordan, play something that's like a Chopin nocturne. And I sit down and I play and I,
you know, I can go and I can speak, you know, I can, I can go into that and start speaking
language. Or somebody says, play something jazzy or, you know, new agey or Genesis-like. I know,
you know, I spent time with the chords. I developed them. I understand many of the changes and
I can go into that mode. So I hope that answers a bit of that question.
Yeah, absolutely. Jordan, I know your time is limited. I hope we get a chance to have a more
in-depth conversation in the future. But let me ask you the last question I ask all my guests,
that if you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization,
what would you say the worst thing humanity has done and what would you say as humanity's
greatest achievement? Well, it relates very much to, you know, my idea of technology,
you know, letting, letting advancements in technology go beyond who we are and what we
are as human beings. That's very dangerous. It's almost, I think about like this last Dream Theater
album that we just made, the astonishing where the robots have kind of taken over.
Mm hmm. So I think that it's a matter of kind of like control and purpose and values. You know,
some humanity has a tendency of letting things kind of get out of spiral, out of control,
where we create things that are just beyond our, our spectrum of, you know, reach and physical,
mental capability. So there's nothing wrong with computers, but I just, I really value the part
where we're in touch with them, where we're controlling them, where we're, you know, we as a, as a
people have, you know, have the, have the kind of core value, the control, the power,
and we don't just let it all go to, to this, you know, kind of digital self-control way of operating.
Mm hmm.
