So although I applaud the private companies, whether it's, you know, what Elon Musk or
Jeff Bezos is doing, and I think it's incredible in that you need the private sector to take
things, to make them economically competitive.
Those companies could not exist without government funding and more to the point without DARPA
funding Hello and welcome to the 42nd episode of Neohuman
Podcast.
I'm Agabahari at Agologist on Twitter and Instagram and you can follow the show on LiveInLimbo.com,
iTunes and YouTube.
With me today I have Sharon Weinberger.
Welcome to the show Sharon.
Thank you.
Thanks for having me.
Sharon Weinberger, why don't we start with your background, the work you've done and
what are you focusing on mostly these days?
So I'm a national security journalist and these days an editor at Foreign Policy Magazine.
Most of my career has focused on writing on the intersection of science and technology
and national security.
That's been the vast majority of what I've written about over the years to include this
book on DARPA.
Great.
Yes, you have a new book out called the Imagineers Award, the untold story of DARPA, the Pentagon
agency that changed the world.
So what is DARPA and where did it all begin?
So DARPA is the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
It's an agency that was created in 1958 amid the political turmoil of October 1957 when
the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the world's first artificial satellite and this sort of
became a political crisis because it represented to the American public and particularly to
President Eisenhower's critics that the United States had fallen behind the Soviet Union
in the space race and that the Soviets were advancing militarily as well.
So amid this crisis, President Eisenhower authorized the creation of this new agency,
the Advanced Research Projects Agency, whose primary goal would be to get America into
space.
So ARPA, as it was called at the time, was the nation's first space agency.
This predated the creation of NASA.
It sort of vacuumed up all of the space programs with this singular goal in mind.
So can we consider moon landing ultimately the result of the creation of DARPA?
In some ways, very much yes.
So there's a caveat to that.
DARPA, the D for defense was added in 1972, but let's just call it DARPA for consistency.
They actually, they held the space programs for about a year and a half before losing
them, first with the creation of NASA, which took over civilian space, and then eventually
the military services, the Air Force, Navy, and Army sort of won a bureaucratic battle
to get their space programs back.
But even those initial programs that DARPA created in those first years were very critical.
So the Saturn rocket, which took the astronauts to the moon, was the sort of the child of
the first director of DARPA, who went to Werner von Braun and said he wanted to fund this
rocket program.
And the similar thing can be said about internet, correct?
Because it started with ARPANET.
Yes, absolutely.
So the one thing that really cemented DARPA's reputation, and probably the reason it still
exists today, because you know, agencies come and go, was that DARPA was very involved,
and this goes back to the early 1960s, in creating the first computer networking program,
which by the late 1960s became ARPANET, which was the first linking of computers around
the country.
When this was transitioned to the civilian world under the National Science Foundation,
it became the internet.
That's very much something that DARPA can claim credit for and is what cemented its
sort of modern reputation as an innovation powerhouse.
So you mentioned that DARPA started as a part of a Cold War, the Cold War ended more than
20 years.
What is the role of DARPA today, and what are they mostly focused on right now, today?
That's an excellent question.
The hardest period of DARPA's existence, because a lot of what my book does is charts the ups
and downs of DARPA's history, whether it's the Vietnam War, or the height of the Cold
War.
So after the fall of the Soviet Union in the 1990s was really DARPA's in some ways most
depressing period, because here you have an agency that was created to keep us technologically
ahead of the Soviet Union, and then the Soviet Union doesn't exist.
So they went through sort of this depressing and turbulent period where they tried to reinvent
themselves as sort of a dual-use agency, you know, maybe we can focus more on civilian
projects.
It didn't work well.
They sort of had failed or irrelevant project after failed and irrelevant project.
And then after 9-11, they in some senses tried to reinvent, you had a new enemy, you know,
the war on terror was sort of the ups and downs of that.
And they had something of a resurgence, but they're struggling now.
One of the things that they tried to focus on under the last few years was neuroscience,
trying to treat injuries from traumatic brain injury, basically a lot of the injuries that
soldiers suffered from roadside bombs in Iraq and Afghanistan, also treatment for post-traumatic
stress disorder.
So you see a lot of references to exotic projects funded by DARPA for brain chips.
One of the things that they just turned again now to very much in the past year is hypersonic
weapons.
They're sort of, first of all, the current director of DARPA managed hypersonic weapons
programs back when he was a program manager at DARPA.
So he has a very direct interest in it.
And you have with sort of the war of words with Vladimir Putin, sort of this resurgent
interest on new exotic weapons.
And you know, hypersonic weapons, these are weapons, you know, whether aircraft or missiles
that travel many times the speed of sound is sort of in the news again.
And that's what DARPA is pushing.
And I think it's worth mentioning that DARPA overall is a pretty small agency.
They have around, I think, three billion dollars in budgets and less than 200 people personnel,
correct?
Yes.
And it's sort of interesting because those numbers sort of don't tell the whole story.
So on one hand, you know, three billion or 3.2 billion is maybe one tenth of NASA's budget.
But what makes DARPA's three billion dollars so powerful is it's not committed to programs.
You know, NASA is spending, you know, X amount on the International Space Station.
It can't just move money around.
DARPA can and will very quickly start up new projects and can allocate tens of millions
or, you know, some cases even, you know, a hundred of millions of dollars to something
new or innovative.
In terms of the personnel, yes, it is sort of interesting that DARPA has grown a lot
over the years.
When I was going through the archives, DARPA in the 1960s, which in some ways was its most
innovative period, the roster of DARPA personnel could fit on an index card.
And now it's a small phone book because you have under 200 employees of DARPA, but they
also employ now sort of an arsenal of private contractors who provide everything from technical
support to administrative support.
But yet still, this is much leaner than most parts of government.
Recently, we had a news that Google is aiding Department of Defense with their drones with
Google's AI technology.
What are the chances of private sector to completely replace DARPA and maybe even extend
on the role that DARPA is playing in the government today?
I don't think in any sense it can replace DARPA because DARPA's role is unique.
You know, it is at the end of the day, it is to develop weapons and technology for the
Pentagon.
So DARPA itself doesn't create these things.
It funds these things, you know, whether at private companies like Google or at smaller
companies.
DARPA is the program, man, it's sort of the organizer of this funding.
I mean, even for Google, when it's working on artificial intelligence for the military,
it's not like it sits in its R&D lab and creates something for the military.
It's directed by someone.
So that's one thing.
One of the things that has changed over the years is, you know, most of our modern computer
science departments and companies can trace their lineage directly back to DARPA.
In the 1960s, when DARPA got into computer science, it was the only player in the, you
know, it was the player, you know, there was no one else out there.
But DARPA now has other areas, you know, like neuroscience, like hypersonics.
You don't have a lot of private sector funding going into hypersonic weapons or hypersonic
flight.
So it's essentially, you know, what areas can DARPA move the needle in?
You know, it still does good work in computer science, but it's very tiny compared to what
goes on in the private sector.
But to answer your question directly, no, I don't think the private sector can replace
DARPA.
DARPA is what has traditionally funded the private sector in areas that the private sector
is not yet ready to invest in.
Yeah, the reason I ask, because the space exploration program, there are a lot of private
sector players on it now, like SpaceX.
And NASA has taken advantage of their...
That's a great point.
But let me address something very specifically on that SpaceX.
Its programs would not exist were it not for the government and specifically NASA, they're
building on billions of dollars of government money that has gone into rocket science over
the years.
So although I applaud the private companies, whether it's, you know, what Elon Musk or
Jeff Bezos is doing, and I think it's incredible, and that you need the private sector to take
things to make them economically competitive, those companies could not exist without government
funding and more to the point without DARPA funding.
So let me ask you this.
How much of our commercial and consumer technology today is a direct or indirect result of research
and production by the DOD, the Department of Defense, and how much of that is the result
of DARPA?
So I think it'd be hard to quantify, you know, whenever someone tries to quantify something,
I get these long reports that I find sort of methodologically flawed.
What we can do is...
So let's take an example, you know, sometimes, you know, DARPA officials will over-claim
that cell phones, the microelectronics in cell phones, all trace back to DARPA.
When I actually went back and interviewed some of the program managers, they're actually,
they're much more modest.
There are some microelectronics in cell phones that went to DARPA, but it's not that DARPA
enabled the entire cell phone industry, but it certainly played a role in it.
Certainly the internet with ARPANET was very direct to DARPA.
If you want to talk about government innovations, modern satellite navigation, GPS, was a Navy
project with actually at one point DARPA involvement in the very early years of the 1950s with
a predecessor satellite.
GPS navigation, you know, maybe it would have existed at some point in history, but we wouldn't
have the GPS constellation today, but obviously it's a military system without DARPA, without
DOD, and without government involvement.
You know, so you can look across the spectrum of the things that we use in our everyday
lives.
Cell phones, internet, GPS navigation, drones is another example.
Drones dates back directly to DARPA funding for projects starting as early as the 1960s
and going through the 1990s.
Again, it's not saying that drones never would have existed without DARPA, but they wouldn't
have been this boom that they are now and certainly not on this time scale without DARPA's
early funding for it.
So I don't know how to quantify that except to say that, you know, if you look anecdotally
at the projects, it's quite significant.
Talk a little about why did you write the book at this point?
Why did you think that this was a necessary book to be written now?
So in two parts, the first was that, you know, as someone who's written about Pentagon science
and technology for almost two decades now, you know, DARPA is both the most important
and most intriguing player in this, both in terms of the amount of funding it has and
this very unique role it's played in funding everything from oddball projects to very successful
projects and some very, very unsuccessful ones as well.
Just to be clear, this is a critical history of DARPA as they've had their ups and downs.
And I've been talking with friends for a long time about, you know, what would a history
of DARPA tell us?
You know, is it as successful as it claims?
And if so, why is it successful and is it still as successful?
And so these sort of questions intrigued me and, you know, DARPA is not a good narrator
of its own past.
They commissioned one internal history in 1975 that was so good, so detailed and so
critical that when it was done, the new director of DARPA basically classified it and locked
it up in a safe for a decade.
So they're not good since then of chronicling their own history.
So the opportunity to go back through the archival records, to sue the Pentagon for
records, to interview the former directors was really this opportunity to say like, okay,
so is it as good as it claims it is?
And to be honest, it's a mixed legacy.
It's some great successes and some incredible failures.
One of our listeners, Fritz Harald from Canada has a two part question he starts with.
Since every technology is evolved from a military context, is technology tainted by design
and therefore harmful to our future in the end?
And is using billions of tax dollars annually to further military tools good for our society?
And are we getting a good return on our investment financially and socially?
Oh, that's a great question.
So one of the things that I talk about, and one of the reasons I'm so drawn to these
question of the military and science is that question, you know, the military funded science
is very successful.
It's very good at producing technologies in part because the Pentagon needs things.
It needs to blow things up.
It needs to create aircraft, you know, and so if you think those are good things, then
military funded science is very good.
If you're critical of, you know, drone warfare, if you're critical of the military technologies
are created, then it's not a good thing.
So I don't make a value judgment in that.
What I try to point out to people is there is a consequence to having military funded
science.
It takes science and technology in different directions than civilian science, and so that
is a judgment we have to make as a country.
I raise this at the end of the book with neuroscience, where there are these very troubling ethical
questions of having the military involved in neuroscience and medical research because
the military has very different interests.
They wish to, you know, I mean, be careful how I phrase that.
The military's job is to, you know, basically defend the United States, which in many cases
is through conducting warfare, and so is that an appropriate place to have a large part
of your country's neuroscience research funded from.
There are consequences to who funds research, and we have to be at least understand what
the consequences are when we make decisions about whether that's good or bad.
Is there any alternative though, because now we're hearing about how China is advancing
in artificial intelligence and they have the three best supercomputers in the world.
Is there really any way that we can imagine that the Department of Defense in the United
States at one point would be like, okay, we're not really in a competition, we just want
to serve our people in our country?
Yeah, so there is, so if we take it down to the science and technology question, one of
the reasons you don't have a DARPA in Europe or Japan or in many other countries is they're
very wary of having the military fund science and technology.
And it's funny because you have this sort of ongoing revolving door of European politicians
and bureaucrats coming to visit DARPA because they're fascinated by the DARPA model and
wanting the successes of DARPA, but they absolutely know it would not be possible politically
to have a military funded science and technology agency of DARPA scope in Europe or in Japan.
To the China question is different, so I'm first of all a bit of a skeptic, I mean I
think China's making great advances in this area, but I think there's a lot of hype surrounding
Chinese advances in artificial intelligence and hypersonics, I think a lot of it is over
right.
Why do you think that is?
First of all, because it's happened in the past, part of the history of the book that
I cover is when the, it comes straight from the past, in the 1980s DARPA wanted to convince
Congress to fund a billion dollar initiative in artificial intelligence.
And so it went to Japan, which at the time was sort of the boogeyman that China is now,
and toured their computer science and their artificial intelligence initiatives.
And they came back and essentially lied, and you know I have the interviews where they
talk about this, where they said, yes Japan is on the very verge of making artificial
intelligence.
Japan was nowhere near that, it's nowhere near that now, and so I see that again with
China.
China has very advanced computer science, but it is not on the verge of creating artificial
intelligence, and frankly neither are we, it's being used in a sense for people who
wish to hype their budgets to the United States, and you know is that good or bad?
You know if it advances computer science, people do what they think is effective.
And they've been successful in hyping it then.
They have been very successful.
What do you see as the biggest national security threat or threats to the United States today?
Oh wow, I think the biggest threat to national security is ourselves, in the sense that we
have been at war now for approaching 17 years, and we have a generation in the United States
that have grown up thinking that it's normal to always be at war.
And you see these same debates in Israel about concerns about generations now in Israel who
think that warfare is normal.
You know warfare, I am for a strong national security, I am for a strong military, but
the goal of a strong national security and the goal of a strong military is to not be
at war.
And I'm very concerned about a mentality in the United States where we accept this
as normal.
It should not be normal, this should be the exception.
I'm originally from Iran, you mentioned Israel and I always found Israel fascinating because
they made so much with so little amount of resources that they had scientifically and
technologically and it served their military and national defense.
How do you see the future of countries like Iran or Saudi Arabia that they haven't invested
as much on science and technology as a western country?
How do you see the future of countries like that?
A science and technology base is a very hard thing to buy, you have to invest in it.
So yeah, let's take Saudi Arabia for an example which has spent a lot of money on its military
on an advanced technology and you know look where it's ended them up in a long protracted
war in Yemen that is a humanitarian disaster and it's not been particularly successful
for Saudi Arabia either.
I'm not an expert in Saudi Arabia but I'm guessing their science and technology base
is not something that's been invested that heavily in.
I could be wrong, I'm not familiar with the extent of different areas, different faculties
at universities in Saudi Arabia but I'm willing to guess they've spent a lot on procuring
military technology and not a lot on investing basic science.
Because basically spending to buy technology is not going to replace investing to develop
it locally.
Well not just developing it but again having a science base, you know if you look at DARPA,
if you look at the DARPA model, I mean some of what DARPA does is it does develop weapons
but a lot of what it funds is in the science base for the future, you know in microelectronics,
in biology, in areas that aren't going to necessarily result in an aircraft tomorrow
next year or even in the next decade but there are things that advance our knowledge about
the world.
Is there a big picture objective or rather philosophy for DARPA or perhaps the DoD?
There is, you know DARPA the motto that they've used in many recent years, going back several
decades now, is preventing technological surprise and now in the sort of the post-Cold War era
they sort of add and creating technological surprise.
I think that they are struggling a bit in the post-Soviet you know world of what is
our mission because we don't have a technological peer.
You know now with the hype of China they can kind of hang their hat on that but it's still
difficult, we're still much more advanced than China when it comes to military technology
despite what you know you might see in the newspapers and magazines.
Well as you said hype is beneficial to people who are getting the money.
As it's always been everywhere in the private sector and in government and in national security
and to a certain extent it's understandable but you have to at least be a little bit wary
of what people are claiming.
Yeah fair enough, as data is becoming the most valuable commodity how do you see the
relation between humans and military evolve in the coming years and decades?
You know so it's funny as you can kind of get the sense, I'm a bit of a technology
skeptic in some ways, DARPA has invested a lot in data, it's certainly very important
for the military, there's sometimes a tendency to wish a little too much out of this data.
There was this program in Afghanistan where they were going to collect all of the data
because you know the U.S. military has so much data, they have intelligence collected
by the National Security Agency, they had aircraft going all over Afghanistan mapping
every bit of terrain, they had social science data, I mean just as they tried to collect
all this data and make predictions about where the next insurgent attack would be, what village
would fall to the Taliban, it didn't really do a lot of good, I don't know what to say
other than data isn't knowledge.
Okay fair enough, what is next for you and where can people find about your work?
Sure, so what's next for me is I've been toying with the idea of doing a military history
of artificial intelligence to talk about some of the subjects that we've just spoken about.
Really what it means when the military is the greatest funder of artificial intelligence
and how that put in our country and Japan and China artificial intelligence on different
trajectories.
You know Japan went very different directions, not altogether successfully either with its
artificial intelligence programs.
So that's what I've been thinking about working on for a next book, but to be honest
I'm still in sort of the formative stages of thinking about the framing of that.
These days I mostly edit at Foreign Policy Magazine and foreignpolicy.com, I do have
an article coming out next month which an MIT's Undark magazine, it's a science magazine
at MIT where they asked me to write about something I didn't include in the book.
So it's a chapter about how DARPA was responsible for creating the first national climate program
and most of our understanding today about climate change and global warming comes from
DARPA's concerns about the Soviet Union and what they were doing with nuclear weapons
back in the 1960s.
So that's what's up next.
Fantastic.
And let me ask you the last question that I ask all my guests, that if you come across
an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you say as the worst thing humanity
has done and what would you say as our greatest achievement?
I would say warfare is the worst thing.
The best achievement is ending warfare, which we haven't quite accomplished yet.
