You do need to have a stronger force than people that invade you.
Yeah, that's my whole point.
I agree, but I don't think you have to run a protection racket to get that stronger force.
So rather than have a government and all of the huge financial burden that that encompasses,
you have private companies.
You have private security forces, and those private security forces are part of a consortium
that makes the rules, and all the private companies pay into the consortium to keep it going.
And if any of them breaks the rules, then they get kicked out of the consortium.
Well, who will own the nuclear weapons? Because they exist right now, already.
That's what I'm talking about, that right now, what are our options? Because what happened in
Seattle with respect to- Yeah, this can't change overnight.
No. You'd have to probably dismantle the nuclear weapons over a period of decades.
Exactly. If not centuries.
Yeah, it could be a long time.
You know, good and bad, it's so subjective, and I think this is actually a good point of beginning.
If you guys are comfortable with start at this point, that a lot of what we're going through
right now as a society is, again, I go back to what we were talking about last time.
It's the matter of this alignment issue and alignment challenge, or whatever you want to
call it, that there is a narrative that is being offered, basically, or demanded maybe by a
centralized structure of authority, whether it's a government, or an agency, or a department,
or a local government, or anything like that. And people have their own interpretation of it
because of the social media, because people just talk to each other and they come to different
kind of a conclusion. And I think this is an inherent addition of our time that is
expanding this gap that has existed between us further and further.
Who is us here? Between us humans?
Us humans. You know, like what is the big picture of-
You're lumping all humanity into one pile?
Well, in one pile of disagreeing with each other, absolutely.
Okay, that's fair enough.
Because what is that one objective, big picture-wise, that the entire humanity is following?
This is something I actually ask Michio Kaku whether or not we can consider type one civilization
based on Kardashev's scale as some kind of an objective scale that would become a planetary
civilization, because we're not even type one now, we're type zero. But
Were we ever type one, and we regressed, or we haven't got to type one yet?
No, we haven't got to type one yet. So, Michio Kaku was saying that this is actually the most
sensitive and risky kind of a situation to transfer from type zero to type one. We're either
going to make it, or we're going to destroy ourselves. But at the same time, a lot of the
addition required to become type one civilization are a lot of things that we're going to have to
become type one civilization are a lot of things that we are arguing against right now. This kind
of monopolized narrative, for example, on climate, or monopolized narrative on taxation, monopolized
narrative on culture, on values. Great.
But what defines a type one civilization?
So type one civilization is a planetary civilization that would use all the
resources of the planet, basically, in order to be able to use them for whatever kind of objective
that we have. So weather, all the elements of the planet, basically. So we are not that,
at this point, because we're using dead plants and dead animals, oil and gas and carbon
as a source of energy. By the time we get to a point that we can, again, we're already in a very
controversial kind of area, because some people would say, aha, he's a globalist, because he's
advocating for controlling the weather, which is true. But at the same time, you don't want
a single government to be in charge of the weather.
Some people do. Some people want a global government that is their end game.
Yeah. And that's a problem, right?
That is one way forward, is to have a monoculture, a global culture that is the same everywhere.
Well, we're working on that one. Unfortunately, it's not our culture.
Well, what is our culture? What is our culture? You're talking about the Western culture.
As one example, correct.
Right. Who do you think is doing a better job at this point, establishing that one culture, or one
civilization?
Well, I hate to use the word better in that sentence, but I think the CCP is pushing pretty
hard at promoting their version of reality. And we seem to be, when our Prime Minister proclaims
that he envies what the CCP is doing and how they're doing it, then you have to sort of sit
back in your chair and go, really? I mean, what's going on here?
Yeah, basic dictatorship.
I mean, that's the right answer. I'm not sure he grasps that or views it that way, but that's my
interpretation of what he said.
What do you think, David?
Would you say CCP is the largest single culture in the world today, in terms of people?
Like, you wouldn't say the Western culture is a single culture, would you? Or do you put that at
the same level as…
Well, I think Judeo-Christian, if you put it in that label, then you raise it to that abstraction,
and then we're a pretty large entity. I don't know, what would the numbers look like compared to…
Judeo-Christian is over 2 billion, and CCP is under 2 billion.
But CCP is not a culture. CCP is a gang, basically, that has taken over a country.
And the nationalist Chinese who fled China to Taiwan, those are the people who inherit
the Chinese culture. It goes back 5,000 years or whatever. So CCP's culture is a politically driven
culture of domination. That's what it is.
And because of the kind of technology and the will and the ability to use the technology,
there is a very good chance that they can dominate, I don't want to say the entire of the globe,
but most of the globe, with the same kind of a… same kind of…
Outreach that they have practiced very successfully within Mainland China.
And yeah, I just think back at university now in retrospect, and it was happening then in the 70s
already. That sort of indoctrination was going on at all sorts of levels, which is why we have the
social crisis we do in the West now, because that embracing of communism and socialistic ideology
a.k.a. postmodern a.k.a. Marxism, has really just become a subtext to so much of our civilization.
And I don't think most people realize how it's been inculcated in so much of our civilization,
and what the consequences are. I mean, I talk to the people in the United States,
I talk to the people in the United States of America, I talk to the people in the United States
of America in Pois родin, I talk to the people in the United States of America in Washington.
And what the consequences are. I mean, I talk to the people I talk to in those comments I see
just on Facebook and around, you talk to people, I don't think most people get what's going on.
I think there… there is a bit of an awakening now with what's happening with Antifa and the riots
doesn't make sense. But I'm not sure how many people actually get the underpinnings
that are in place that support this sort of narrative. I mean, it's really deeply steeped
in our society. And I'm not sure how you unpack that anymore. That's my biggest concern now.
Can this be taken apart and the good parts kept? Because there are. I mean, we have to
look after each other, that's for sure. But I don't know if we can unpack this in a civilized
way, unravel it without, you know, battlegrounds being laid and just, you'd hate to use the
word civil war, but there are hints of that possibility in the way this is playing out.
It's going to be very important for whoever gets elected in the US, I think predominantly
because Europe is somewhat lost, to be able to set a tone and most importantly, be able
to set a tone in a way that everyone can get be part of. And I'm not sure how to do that,
how that can be done at this point. But short of that, I think, you know, China is going
to get more and more traction as their propaganda. I mean, we were looking at those stories earlier
were CBC and the Guardian are all saying Russia is invading our research into the COVID vaccines.
But maybe that's true, maybe it isn't, but they're probably the least of our concerns
in terms of people that are actually doing that, right? And to what end? And then nowhere
in those narratives does it talk about are they doing any damage? I mean, we probably
should be sharing that kind of research around the world if we're succeeding. But my biggest
concern was if they're sabotaging any of it, you know, by playing with data, but no
one even casually mentions that risk. So Russia keeps getting pushed up as the villain and
I find it astounding, utterly astounding that no one is publicly stepping up in the mainstream
and calling China out. And every time Trump does, he's vilified.
Well that's one of the reasons that they are not talking about China is because Trump is
talking about it. I don't know if you saw today that Nancy Pelosi called COVID Trump
virus, which is just mind blowing.
Well but then you saw on Church of the Virus there, I posted a link from MedCram and the
opening tagline was CCP virus explained. And someone was really mocking me and just shaking
his head at me for using that term. So you're not allowed to pick on China apparently.
Well I'll tell you this, David, do you have any kind of perspective on this before I get
into my perspective?
Hurry up, David, quick, quick, something. Don't let him get rolling again.
I defer to you, I want to hear your perspective.
Okay I'm not going to let this go now.
Well I think it's very clear why people are not talking about China is because they're
invested in what China represents, which is providing a low regulation kind of a ground
so you can do whatever you want to do. You don't have to treat your workers well, you
don't have to pay them well, you can use slave labor and just make money basically out of
the entire operation. And a lot of people within the United States, not only media and
a lot of people within the Democratic Party, but a lot of the media apparatus, they're
heavily invested in this whole order that really has been established since after World
War II, which is basically about mixing US economy with global economy. That's what
this whole thing has been all about.
And at the same time we're going through this cultural shift from having some kind of a
set narrative based on very limited channels of interpretation and distribution of information
to this explosion of platforms and ability for people to express themselves. And I feel
like we're like monkeys given machine guns and we're just going insane with the use of
Twitter and different kinds of social media and that deepfakes are coming. We can't just
make up stuff from scratch because media and a lot of people are already doing it by editing
videos in the way that they want to represent it. But when you can just make up something
from the scratch, something that has absolutely no basis on reality whatsoever and half the
population would believe it and make political decision on that basis. I think we're in complete
uncharted territories and regardless of whoever is going to be elected in November, it's
going to be a complete mess. But the silver lining in all of this to me is that a lot
of what we are relying on to evaluate whether as good or bad, they're not as solid as we
think they are. Let's say, for example, the Democratic Party right now that is practically
a Trojan horse for whoever that is willing to join them against United States, which
is I think my argument against the point you made, Fritz, that a lot of these people are
not pro any specific kind of a system. They're against the system and that is the capitalist
American and as they put it racist system of the West that they see no value in it whatsoever
because of whatever that they've learned and whatever that they believe. But it's not like
they're hardcore communist or the hardcore Marxist. There are people who are hardcore
communists and hardcore Marxist among them. But my point is that this is a massive tent
against America and against capitalism and against the West. And at the same time, on
the other side of the equation, you see that Trump has created his own version of a massive
and expanded tent against this narrative that no, America is good. We've achieved a lot.
German civilization is the most successful civilization in the world. It's pulled out
majority of people out of poverty because of capitalism. And so I think Zizek said it
best that at this point, this is a moment of philosophy that we are at the level that
we're talking about. Hey, what do we need? What is the definition of civilization? What
is the definition of a society? What are the values that worth preserving or we have the
obligation of destroying? So that's what we are talking about. It's not like we are headed
towards any kind of a specific direction in either way, whether against the West or for
the West in favor of CCP, which we are not majority of the world, including majority
of the Chinese people are not in favor of the CCP. But at the same time, if United States
is so divided that you elect anybody in November 3rd or November 4th, and half the country
will be like, it's not my president. I'm just not going to listen to this person. I don't
care who he is. I'm not going to follow it. And we see the traces of it right now that
some states are saying, we don't care if you're going to send send federal troops. We're not
going to we don't want them. You know, Portland is saying it right now. Pennsylvania, I'm
sorry, Philadelphia said it yesterday, New York is saying it there you you bring federal
troops, we might end up arresting the federal troops. And that is exactly what will lead
to civil war quite possibly. And the gap that will that will be created as a result of this
will be perfect for anybody to step in, you know, it could be partially CCP, it could
be partially Hezbollah and Iran, could be partially Muslim Brotherhood, and it could
be partially countless number of militias that already exist in United States and take
over this country. And basically, it's the end of United States as a union.
So going back to Portland, are there already federal agencies in Portland? Yeah, like who
who who are the ones that are in unmarked uniforms, picking off protesters and throwing
them in unmarked? So actually, that is that is fake news. They are not unmarked uniforms.
What they don't have is their names. They don't have name tags because they've been
doxxed before. And that is that is the game that is being played that Oh, look, they're
not then they're not identifying themselves. But they're not identifying themselves because
they've been doxxed. Okay, but are they feds? Their homeland, their homeland security and
their feds defending the federal courthouse that these people have been trying to set
on fire for days now. All right. I don't know if you saw the footage of some of these I
don't call them protesters. They're not even rioters. These are, I guess, insurgents revolutionaries,
because there's no point of discussion. There is no point of argument. The point of the
revolution for them is the revolution. They want to topple the system. That's that's
what they want. And let me actually share this link with you. Because I think this is
interesting that we're talking about it right now. That this I think Portland is very interesting
because this is how it could start. This could be if that spreads to other cities. Yeah,
absolutely. Absolutely topple the US. So this gentleman, he's president of Portland Police
Union, who's been targeted by in protests, and he said that the community has had enough
now he looks like a black American, but we don't know because if he is going to vote
for Joe Biden, then he will be considered black. If he's not voting for Biden, then
he ain't black. According to Biden, of course, we know that. But he said the elected officials,
the elected officials meaning the mayor and anybody who's allowing this insanity to go
on I believe today is the 55th day that this mess has been going on. He said that the elected
officials have condoned the destruction and chaos at Turner, they have placed a political
agenda ahead, ahead of safety and welfare of the community. This must stop. He's also
said that this is no longer about George Floyd, racial equality, racial equity, social justice
reform, or the evolution of policing. Turner said this is about violence, rioting and destruction.
Our city is under siege by rioters. And I think that's absolutely spot on. You know,
and this is the head of the police union in Portland. So people who are watching what's
going on and there are a lot of them because there is nothing else to do right now in United
States other than watching stuff. You can go out, there is a curfew in a lot of places
including Florida. They are watching this insanity and people don't want that. People
don't want their cities and their neighborhoods to be burned to the ground because of racism
or whatever it is. You know, but this is, this is a narrative that is going nowhere
because they have redefined racism altogether. That any kind of a system that leads to this
kind of an inequality, according to them, is nonsensical, you know, by design. All it
has to be toppled altogether. It has to be destroyed and something else come in the place
of it. So I totally agree with Fritz that there is no civil way to get out of this.
And I don't know, but what I do know is that absolute majority of people are not in favor
of it. Well, how many people are actually actively
part of this rioting? And I think that's probably the correct word because it ain't protesting.
No. Like what? I can never find what kind of numbers
because when I think back in the 60s or when all the riots were going on, you know, half
of LA gets burnt to the ground or a large, several city blocks get burnt to the ground.
Students get gunned down, you know, university campuses. You had a sense of numbers and people
and the protests. I mean, when, when you look at the marches, the million man marches on
Washington and the civil rights movement, it was very real. But what I see now is like
something out of a video game where you're getting this very narrow myopic view of what's
going on. And do we have any handle on how many people are actually destroying everything
for everyone else? And how much of this is? And it was initially the media was just driving
this. And then I think at some point, the mainstream media clue it into the fact that
this was helping Trump. So now they've backed way off and you don't see a lot of this stuff.
Not all of them though, they're, they're capitalizing a lot on this fact that people
coming in unidentified cars and just snatching people off the street. Nancy Pelosi called
them Trump stormtroopers. Right. But that's the back end, right? They never show the Apple
store day before yesterday when the rioters were there, the actual riot, the stuff that,
you know, that would drum up anti rioter, that stuff's not so there always, there's
always this backhanded stuff that's in the media now. If they can spin it as an anti
Trump thing, then it makes the news. But actually, you know, showing what's actually going on
the day to day because there's a lot of looting and rioting still underway. And I don't see
that in the media as Yeah. Yeah, I don't know about the exact numbers. But I do know that
a lot of people within the Democratic Party, and this is one of the reasons that I am not
as terrified as I was maybe two months ago, with respect to the prospect of Democrats
winning in November, because the moment they win, their own civil war will continue because
this is not an ideologically unified group of people. Yeah. This is again, a tent that
has been set up around the animosity against Donald Trump. That's what it is. And GOP has
the same problem too, within the conservatives. Now we see that we have started to see a little
traces of it, that a unity that exists within the GOP and conservatives and evangelicals
and you know, it's a big tent on the other side too. It is around the support of Trump.
It's all about Trump. So good and bad and right and wrong and all of this is being defined
on the basis of whether or not you support or oppose Trump. But I think they're playing
an insane kind of a game. And I don't know when they're going to wake up because CNN
and CNN's office in Georgia was firebombed. And they couldn't believe it. Some leftist
publications offices were firebombed. The far left mayor of Portland House is a target
of the attack of the rioters. And this is the guy who has ordered the police in Portland
just to stay put, don't do anything, let them do whatever they want to do.
Well, it was interesting. I watched that video on Sunday on the grooming gangs in the UK.
What happened in the last 10 years in the UK is what we're seeing here now, where the
political correctness is now impacting law enforcement, it's impacting the judicial system,
it's impacting the behavior of our elected people. And not in a good way. So it's about
right. I've always noted that we're five to 10 years behind Europe in our social behavior.
And so this was last 10 years, this has been unraveling in the UK. And now we're seeing
it here. Because when you look back over the last 10 years, the riots in London, the stuff
that was going on in the UK in terms of people beating each other up and the police just
stepping back, is what's happening here now. So it's, it's, yeah.
It's the same playbook. They're saying it very clearly. I don't know if you know this
woman Linda Sarsour, who is Linda Sarsour is a pawn of Muslim Brotherhood in United
States. She's not even hiding it. She's a hardcore, Marxist Muslim Islamist, who is
not in favor of two state solution. She's in favor of one state solution. And that one
state is Palestine. And she was one of the organizers of women's march that all of these
American women went with their pussy hats. Some of them wore US flag as a headscarves
that people like me coming from that part of the world will be like, are you out of
your freaking mind? What are you doing? Don't you see the big picture here? But it's the
same playbook. And they've said it repeatedly that we're the people who started spring Arab,
the Arab Spring in the Middle East and Northern Africa some 10 years ago, why can't we doing
it right here in United States? They're doing the same thing. The problem with United States
with all of this going on is that every single one of these actions are unconstitutional.
And people are losing their minds because a lot of the lawmakers and I'm talking about
Republicans who supposed to be standing up for constitutional rights of American citizens.
They're also sitting back very quietly, absolute majority of them, which reminded me of the
Conservative Party in Canada, that instead of standing up for your principles and values,
the solid ground that has basically preserved your validity to exist within this dynamic,
they're giving it up all for the sake of public opinion, mob opinion, basically.
Well, the ability to do to do to dox people and destroy them on on, you know, it's, it's
unbelievable. Yeah, I just my summer, my summer reading was Don't Burn This Book and The Madness
of Crowds. And so I plowed through those, which was more books than I normally read
in a lifetime. But they were they're great bookends, those two books. And they and they
they have very different information, but very similar sensibilities and where they're
coming from. And I mean, Douglas Murray just he recants the story of 1990s, where he went
when he was doing research for a university paper, and he went into London to the communist
party headquarters and was invited and talked to the people and being gay, he was potentially
part of the solution. And they said in no uncertain terms in these meetings to when
Doug was there, Douglas Murray that we've lost the working class in England. The working
class don't support us anymore. Right. The working class have it too good. So we have
to weaponize new people and we're now targeting the women's the feminist movement, the gay
community, the trans community, we're targeting these people, and we're going to weaponize
them to promote our cause. And it's come to pass. It's just so sobering to hear that,
you know, emphatically documented. And then at the time, I would have shaken my head that's
not possible in our system. Our democracy is way too strong. But maybe that's one of
the weaknesses of democracy. That because everyone's individual rights are so important,
that leaves us vulnerable to divide and conquer. But I still keep thinking that the majority
of the people in the United States, the majority of people in Canada, don't support what's
going on.
No, they don't.
That's the most surprising thing about the left is they've lost the working class. The
left is divorced from the working class. Has that ever happened before in the history of
leftist politics?
But the answer is in that, isn't it? I mean, the solution is that should be so obvious
to the political people is right there. And yet they're playing into this small group
of people that are driving the narrative.
But I mean, even this coalition that you mentioned, women, LGBTQ, trans, even that is not a solid
kind of a coalition.
No, and Murray goes, that's what his book's about. He's showing how all these are fragmented
and fighting each other.
Yeah. The letter that just came out, it was signed by a whole bunch of people.
Harvard.
Indians cancel culture. But JK Rowling has been hammering on this trans issue for quite
some time because this is very obvious that for the sake of ideology, you want to erase
so much rights that women over many, many decades have fought for to gain.
Basically overnight, you expect them to give it up for the sake of an ideology with some
kind of a completely incoherent, obscure kind of an outcome. You don't know what you're
going for. You know what you're running away from, but you have no idea what you're running
towards.
I like Douglas Murray's analogy of, you know, we've all been on this train, we've all hashed
this stuff out and we've been streaming along and finally we're pulling into the station
and we can all get off this ideological train and work on the solutions we've come up with.
But instead of stopping the train, it's now full steam ahead into oblivion and no one's
had a chance to get off and benefit from all the things. I mean, when you look at what's
happened in all the various aspects of our culture, the level of openness and inclusion
is phenomenal. It's never been this great. And yet everyone wants to dismantle it now.
It's bizarre. And I agree with you that with no rhyme or reason, it's just destroyed for
destroying sake. You look back at, you know, I look back at the Russian Revolution and
the turn of the century and what was going on in the Soviet Union. And I mean, by God,
those people had a reason to be rioting. And then with that same logic and the same narrative,
we're now trying to destroy one of the best civilizations we've ever created. I mean,
what happens if all the protesters lost their iPhones? They were turned off. But no one's
even suggesting a simple solution like that. Just throw a dampening field on the downtown
area that they've, you know, they're occupied. Just put a dampening field on it and no phone
reception anymore. And see how long this, you know, they don't have to bring troops
in and start, you know, beating people up. Just use the technology against them.
You know, they're bringing troops because local law enforcement are refusing to, because
of the orders given to them by politicians to keep this nonsense under control.
Now is this, is this all, is this a democratic plan to discredit Trump?
Yes, absolutely. That's the narrative.
Because the cities that you're looking at who had riots, I believe 25 of them, 25 out
of 26, they're Democrat run and progressive Democrat run. And you look at their district
attorneys, a lot of people within their law enforcement and justice system. And when you
go back to who supported their campaigns, many of them, you get to George Soros. This
is insane because it's a very clear kind of a plan. It's a very clear kind of an approach.
They did it with climate. They did it in colleges and universities. And a lot of people raised
red flags and alarm about it. Nobody cared about unlike a bunch of kids just, you know,
it's not that important. Well, those kids who were yelling in colleges and universities
and shutting down and silencing speakers who disagree with them. Now they're controlling
certain corporations and offices and taking over different kind of positions that are
very, very effective. But it's also the media and big tech that all together, because these
are not their headquarters in America, but they're not American companies. These are
multinational companies owned by shareholders who are benefiting a lot from globalism. And
there is no reason for them to supporting Trump. Otherwise, if you want to think about
it, what Trump is proposing is far more in favor of the working class than the other
way around. Because the other way around is the reason that all of these jobs and manufacturing
plans have been sent to China to begin with. And these are the people that are looting
and destroying small businesses and making the argument that no, you have to keep your
business shut down. We don't want you to recover. Because if you recover and economy does well,
it's not going to be in favor of us. It's going to be in favor of Trump.
Well, so they're trying to recreate the impoverished class nationally.
I don't think they know what they're trying to do. They're trying to defeat Trump. That's
a thing. Everything is about Trump. They want to defeat Trump. And it shows to me how
desperate they are, that they're willing to go to this length, just to remove this
person because it's a very, very effective person. If you want to see things get even
crazier than they're going to get naturally for the rest of the year, just wait until
Trump perhaps get the third pick of the Supreme Court. If something happens to Ruth Bader
Ginsburg, who is now again dealing with cancer. Can you imagine that in the middle of all
of this? Because hey, we are entering a hurricane season. We already entered hurricane season,
but hurricanes usually hit the parts of United States that usually get hit by hurricanes,
including Florida around September, which is right before the election.
But even if she died tomorrow, there's no chance of confirming another Supreme Court
justice before the election.
Mitch McConnell said he would do it. Interesting. Yeah. Mitch McConnell last year said if there
is a vacancy, because I don't know if you remember, but he did not allow Obama to fill
the Supreme Court vacancy because he was the electioneer in 2016, which was probably the
most effective thing he's done ever in his entire life. Yeah. And he said it last year,
they asked him a question, are you going to do it? He said, absolutely, they're going
to do it. And they can do it because they have majority in the Senate.
Is that all they need?
Yep.
Just passionately, sorry, go ahead.
No, no, no. I was just going to mention that they can do it because of the rule that Democrats
put in place that you don't need 60. Basically, they got rid of the nuclear, they got rid
of they call something. They went in favor of something called nuclear option that you
don't need 60 votes, you only need 51 votes to pass to pass the judicial appointments
for Obama because the Republican led Senate wasn't going along with them. And you know,
when when I'm sorry, Democrats, Republicans were not going along with them. So they lowered
the requirement to 51 instead of 60 people in the Senate, so they can just pass, pass
the judicial nominees. And when Republicans got a hold of Senate, they lowered that standard
for Supreme Court nominees as well. So they only need 51. That's that's how they pass
Gursuch. That's how they pass Kavanaugh. And that's how they will be able to pass.
It's going to be a woman, Amy, Amy Coney Barrett, I think is the next in line who's going to
replace whoever is going to be the vacancy in the Supreme Court.
But you know, when I watch Robert Barnes on talk shows, the American civil rights lawyer,
he talks about he doesn't understand what the Democrats or anyone that side of the house
is talking about because the judges have been, you know, have been really good decisions
that the judges that Trump's put in place, and they aren't nearly as partisan as everyone
says they are. No, they're not. So if less partisan, I mean, so that's really interesting.
That sort of contrast. Well, I mean, when they were protesting outside of the Supreme
Court when Kavanaugh name was announced as the nominee, they already had everything ready
with just the name spot being blank. So we're against blank. I'll just fill it in. Brett
Kavanaugh. They even sent a bunch of letters to some places with X instead of a name. They
just forgot to remove it because it has nothing to do with logic, reason, rationality. It
has everything to do with partisanship and tribalism.
But like, it just seems we're talking about all the ideologies and all that. But at a
grassroots level, you got to put food on the table, you got to have a job, you got to get
stuff done. If anything, the virus has shown us that we have to get on top of what we produce
locally on essential stuff. I mean, certainly, there's no reason we can't produce all the
PPE equipment that we need locally. And that would be a narrative, just get her done, do
it locally, build stuff, make stuff, get people working together, look at what industries
or community can set up that works on a community level. All that's, that would all be such
a positive way to approach this. Small business base, small business base, but I don't see
anyone talking in those terms. But to be fair, the one person who, of all the people that
you'd least expect, has been Doug Ford, our Premier in Ontario, has actually been speaking
that and doing it. But I'm missing that in the US. I see it happening at some levels,
and it may be happening, you just don't hear about it. I don't know.
Well, they cannot talk about it because it is the people who are involved within the
establishment right now who are responsible for sending all the jobs basically to China,
for making United States dependent. 95 plus percent of antibiotics in United States is
coming from China. Right? So the situation is insane. And because these people are benefactors
and beneficiaries basically of this entire globalism that hey, we want slave market without
any kind of a regulation so we can produce cheap and sell for much, much more.
But I'm still, I mean, I hear that, and I don't argue against it. But the long game
would leave North America without a revenue stream for most people to buy the products.
So then what? It seems, it almost, I mean, you mentioned the name earlier, but it almost
looks like someone who's shorting the US economy and a bunch of people are shorting it, which
you know that there's been a history of people wanting to do that. I happen to follow what
went on with Elon Musk and Tesla, and the billions of dollars that have been put in
shorting Tesla, and they've lost, I mean, consistently lost every year now for the last
10 years, and they've tried really, really hard to slag, put them down, and they still
can't create a situation where their short puts make any money. They've lost millions
of dollars. So there's all this stuff going on behind the scenes that are, that make a
difference.
Hey, people notice. People notice. Let me share with you something they actually shared
with you guys yesterday. This is really, really interesting. And this is by Eric Weinstein.
This is not a right-wing insane person. Let's see if I can't find it here.
It's who you ask.
Yeah, yeah, exactly. Exactly. You're right. You're right. Let me, let me see if I can
find it.
I'm a big fan of the portal.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Very interesting perspective.
Well, it's his walking rant on racism.
Right.
That was brilliant. Absolutely brilliant.
He's spot on.
That should have been mandatory viewing everywhere. And I don't know how much traction it got.
But I certainly passed it around to everyone. And everyone that I passed it to was blown
away.
Well, I can't share it with you guys, but I'm just going to read it to you. I shared
it with you the link yesterday on Facebook, but I'm just going to read it. He tweeted,
this is July 20th, I guess like a day, two days ago, that a surprising number of left-leaning
people are confiding to me that they are planning to vote for Trump for two different stated
leading reasons. A, Biden's mental decline. B, what is happening in the Pacific Northwest
with Democratic mayors, governors experimenting with non policing. And this is something that
I want to go even beyond that because people are seeing what we were talking about in the
beginning that this is about, Hey, whether your country, United States is good or it's
bad inherently. Now either it in either direction, you will have traces of the opposite and the
contrast. Like if it's bad, there are obviously some good, good about it. If it's good, there
are some bad about it. But the idea that you want to get rid of the entire system, you
want to burn down everything and you expect people to pay for it along the way because
they're raising taxes. I just don't understand who can go along with it. But then the question
is how many people are aware of what is exactly going on? Because the Biden campaign are playing
it very, very smartly. Ben Shapiro today on Joe Rogan, he was talking about, there is
no way that you can be afraid of Biden because he's not even alive. How can you be afraid
of the corpse? I know the first reason that Einstein said that the leftists were confiding
in him that is due to Biden's mental state. Does that make any sense to you? Because if
that is the case, let's just take that as a given. Wouldn't that just mean power shifts
to the VP, whoever that is? Absolutely. Well, that's why Biden is once in a lifetime opportunity
for the extremists on that camp, that whoever is going to be the VP, Biden is basically
a placeholder. He's not going to be in charge because keep in mind, Biden is 78 and this
is as good as he gets right now. It's just going to get worse. And they're very aware
of it. And it's really insane that some people are more than willing to throw the entire
country under the bus, knowing this guy who you would not put in charge of taking care
of your kids by himself, like babysit your kid by himself. He's lost. It's a shell of
a human being. Unbelievable. I'm going to call it right now. Biden is going to pick
AOC as his VP because that would guarantee a win. I don't think he can do it because
AOC is not the age requirement of becoming the president. And she's just on the backside
of plastic surgery. She's just coming. No, she is. She's just really got plastic surgery.
Yeah, she had a plastic surgery according to she's getting ready for the campaign trail
because she has sort of her resting face is a bit of a frown. So the guess is that's
what she had corrected. But that was on Scott Adams the other day. He was talking about
that. But she already is set to become the environmental advisor to the White House.
He already talked about it. AOC is going to be in charge of the environment, which means
no oil jobs, no gas jobs, no coil, no coal. He already said that Beto O'Rourke is going
to be in charge of guns. And Beto O'Rourke is a person who said, of course we're going
to take away your AR-15 and AK-47s. What kind of question is that? Of course we're going
to do it. And he's from Texas. And probably Elizabeth Warren is going to be in charge
of treasury. It's a disaster. It's a disaster for absolute majority of American people and
the Western civilization if the guy is elected. But the reason I said I'm not as terrified
as I was two months ago, I'm still very terrified about that prospect. But I'm not as terrified
as I was maybe two months ago because I see the inner fighting within them. And they're
shutting down speech. They're shutting down any kind of a debate because they know that
they lose any kind of a debate for this exact same reason that China isn't allowing any
kind of an open discourse. So those are traces of hope, which is the point of this show.
So do you think Trump has a good chance? Of winning? This year, yeah. So there is on NPR,
there is a money tracker of how much Trump and Biden have raised in the 2020 election.
Let me try one more time and see if I can share it with you guys. This zoom is not exactly
my friend probably because of the Chinese Communist Party, but we don't know. They're
listening. They're listening. There we go. So money tracker, how much Trump and Biden
have raised in 2020 election. Now, I don't know if you guys have heard from the media
that Biden has been consistently for the past two months over raising compared to Trump,
which is complete nonsense. Because if you come down, you see it's only one of Biden's
PACs called Biden Victory Fund that's been out raising Trump. But the rest, and Trump
had had a head start, obviously, Trump has raised far more money than Biden. But what's
really, really interesting is based on counties. Look at this map. This is from 2019, people
who have given money to Trump campaign and Biden campaign. And you see on Trump, Los
Angeles County is number one in giving Trump money. More than it's given to Biden. Los
Angeles County, you would imagine that Los Angeles is one of those places that you would
imagine, oh, they're like solid blue. They're all in favor of Democrats. But no, Miami-Dade
is another interesting one with the amount of money that they've given to Trump. Broward
County, which is the county that we're in, one of the infamous counties in Florida, solid
blue, they've given more money to Trump than they give them to Biden. They've given more
than $2 million, almost $2.5 million to Trump, less than $1 million to Biden. So what's the
correlation like between funds and victory? Well, they have, obviously, the ability to
hire people underground. But historically, is there any correlation? I don't know about
that. That would be very interesting to see. At the same time, though, in 2016, Hillary
Clinton raised far more than Trump by a lot, and Trump ended up winning. Trump got far
more free publicity because they didn't take him seriously. So he does not have that advantage
now. He does not have that surprise factor. And now that the CPP have taken over Twitter
and embedded their bots into it when they took it down there last week, God knows what
will happen to all Trump's tweets in the future. Do you think it was the CCP? Because I'm also
hearing that they were patriots within Twitter, because one of the only accounts that was
not touched was Trump's account. Well, that was my initial response, because typically,
you know, 99% of the time it's done from the inside, something like that. No, it was done
on the inside. It was definitely an inside job. Yeah, but they had an insider help them.
Yeah, right. But what I wasn't clear what the outcome of that was. David, you get any
any hint like? No, well, there was the Bitcoin scam. The hackers paid a few hundred thousand
dollars before it was cut off. Apparently, they didn't make it because Coinbase blocked
those transactions. Okay. Yes. They blocked transactions after a point. But once it had
been sent to the address, they cannot get back. That's the nature of Bitcoin. However,
speculation was that this was just a distraction for something more sinister. But I haven't
heard any. That was my brain went right to that, you know, this is, it's too much of
a coincidence that this happened this close to the election. And we know how important
Twitter was to Trump. So I'm wondering if someone's trying to make Twitter less favorable.
Well, I mean, whatever the case is, I think this is very obvious that Twitter at this
point is a matter of national security. Because if you can break into someone's account with
that amount of influence, you can start World War Three. Just imagine somebody in Twitter,
some activists get into Trump's account, like been thinking a lot about it. Xi Jinping is
not going along with my narrative, no longer my friend. I'll talk to him through Rocketman
or something like that. Right? What are you going to do about it? You know, it will be
like a Doctor Strange Love kind of a scenario. Yeah, that hey, that we just have an insane
person we're not actually sending you bombs. We have to retaliate. And YouTube seems to
be going spending going over time now shutting people down with very little explanation.
YouTube is just ridiculous. And I'm saying that as somebody who has a YouTube account
for a couple of years now and creating content, I just look at my subscriber number, it goes
up by like 200 and comes down by 200. And this is like within an hour. And they've deleted
my videos. And I don't have like huge amount of subscribers or followers or anything. I'm
shadow banned. I've been my account was suspended for three months last summer. But they're
doing it very obviously. They don't even care anymore. It's not like they're doing it in
a covert stealth kind of a way. They're just doing the ad. This is what it is, man. You're
not following the narrative. We're not going to favor you. Which Facebook, I'm sorry, Facebook's
doing the same. Yeah. Facebook. I mean, who knows? Who knows? Because Facebook supposedly
is still a little playing on the fence. Hopefully, Peter Thiel sort of, you know, kicks them
every now and then. Well, Peter, Peter Thiel is a very rational human being. His whole
thing is that it's never the worst or the best kind of a scenario. And he's more of
what what's happening right now. And what what can I make out of it? It's really interesting
to listen to him is one of one of the very few people who get a really good idea. He
actually was a person. And maybe seven, eight years ago, they talked about Elon Musk, what
you were talking about, that people are betting against him. I said never bet against Elon
Musk. That's right. No, I was meaning more the fact that he's a major shareholder at
Facebook. Yeah, he's I think he's still on the board as well. Yeah, yeah. So I wonder
if he pokes them every now and then. But I think they need they need to be made into
public utilities, like phones and electricity. But I was reading up on it. Bill Clinton in
the 90s said, Okay, you guys need a break to get rolling. So you're not publishing houses,
you get an exemption. Right. And all that has to be done is that exemption has to be
taken away. No legislation, no change in the rules. Just take the exemption away. And all
of a sudden, you know, YouTube and Facebook and Twitter are all publishing houses responsible
for their content. Isn't that the executive order that Trump signed? He's been trying,
but I haven't seen it roll. I miss that if he has. Yeah, I believe that he signed the
executive order with respect to preserving free speech maybe on on on big tech platforms.
But there is what you're talking about. I can't remember something 35 or something like that.
It's called that yes, they're platforms, they're not publishers, therefore, they're not responsible
for what what's being published. But that was but that's an exemption they got. Yes,
that's the exemption and Facebook ruined their own chance and opportunity of making any kind
of an argument in favor of their exemption by removing the Federalist from Facebook making
the argument that some of the comments put under your post were in violation of our Terms
of Service. And that's what Eric blew everything up that like what are you talking about? Okay,
you know, it's the equivalent of I'm talking on a phone and they just shut me down because
we don't like what you're talking about, basically. Right. So here is my solution.
Break him apart, make him into public utility. Put that entire database of big data into
a blockchain database and pay people for their data. Make people in this country shareholders
are what you're creating. Now, the only person who's talking about this is Andrew Yang, with
respect to he's calling it data dividend. When he said that I was so happy because that's
exactly what I was talking about. I would respect the UBI UBI I don't think it should
be tax funded. I don't think it should be an extension of a welfare state, which is
the far left wants to do it progressives want to do it. It should be funded by user data,
it will incentivize you to create more data, data creation will become your job. You're
making money, you're part of the system. And this entire thing will be will be a public
in public interest rather than being just arm of the media mainstream media because
that's what it is right now.
Okay, yeah, I agree with you. And I think Yang was right on the money with that the
but to make that happen, if they're if they're made publishing houses, or if they're responsible
for their content again, then wouldn't it level the playing field and allow other people
to come up, because then they're big advantage that they don't have to put any energy into
policing their content, you know, except, you know, I suppose they are putting a fair
bit energy into doing that at one level. But if they were truly responsible legally for
the content on their sites, that would change how they could behave and what they could
actually do. And it would let other groups come up. And then the people that offer that
kind of a solution, we're okay, you're on our site, we'll, you know, we'll give you
a say in who's on the site with you will give you a piece of the data that we start collecting
and you become a shareholder in the company that could emerge. I'm always a little bit
skeptical in my old age of legislating or, or requiring that sort of a solution. Like,
I think it has to happen from the grassroots. There are already alternatives, like bit shoot
is an alternative, for example, to YouTube. But it's just a matter of the amount of users
and the amount of amount of data that these users have already created. Hey, think of,
for example, of the man who shall not be named Alex Jones, who was removed overnight. Yeah,
in a very, and I don't even like Alex Jones, I think everybody should be able to say whatever
they want to say, blah, blah, blah, blah, all of that. But the way that he was removed
in a very coordinated kind of a manner, you are basically destroying someone's livelihood,
because you don't agree with the narrative that is being shared. And that he had millions
and millions and millions of followers, millions and millions and millions of dollars made
for YouTube and Google because of his content. No, we just don't want to go away. But so
there's two solutions here I'm hearing. I mean, I'm coming from the perspective, let's
roll back, you know, 40 years in time. And if you have stuff up, you're a publisher.
That would be one and the other solution is what I'm hearing you're saying is, no, no,
you don't get to moderate or mediate the content, you're a utility. Right. So even you have
to go one of those two ways, but we're in this bizarre middle ground right now, because
of the political interests. I think we can do both of them. You make you make the publisher
argument. And immediately after that, you raise a national security threat argument.
Because that's exactly what it is. Yeah. So you set you set the new starting point for
whoever is coming next. Is it going to be parlor? Is it going to be bit shoot? Is it
going to be whoever? But at the same time, it is a national security threat. Because
this is not going to get any less complicated. And create a creating fake news, quote unquote,
is not going to get any harder. This would almost be a good time to just hope the other
fellow there and say, nationhood, national security, you know, protecting a way of life,
how does that fit in to a worldview that where we don't have nations? Let's hear it. What
do you mean we don't have nations? Well, if we if we step away in Canada as a nation,
allegedly, some would argue that. But not true, though. There's a thing. Well, yeah,
there are tribal components. Yeah, we're post national. Yeah. But there's tribal components
to our existence. Human existence, there always have been tribal components. And our strength
has been that we can gather together to a whole bunch of tribes and agree on a common
goal. And that sort of left us with nations. And we've, we were starting goal. Pardon me?
Yeah, I don't agree with that. What's our common goal? Well, that's what I'm putting
on. Well, a common goal would be food production, sharing resources, providing services that
other group can't provide. You don't need that nation to provide food. Food was around
long before nations. But you didn't share it necessarily, or you didn't sell it back
and forth. Yep. People traded food before nations existed. But what's the argument not
to have nations? Like, how do you how do you frame that? At this point, right now? Nations
are a liability. We'd have nuclear wars if there weren't for nations. There would be
trade wars if there weren't for nations. We wouldn't have them. Is it nations or governments?
If you get rid of governments, and you have, let's say, because my argument, I don't think
that you can get rid of governments. And I am not against anything that exists, because
I think anything that exists exists for a reason, as a consequence of series of events
and the behavior of the system and all of that. But I think, for example, in case of
United States, government should be limited to the military. And I really can't think
of anything else that you just secure the borders. And you guarantee this the security
of of people who are within that structure. And that's the amount of that's the amount
of taxes that you pay to to preserve that kind of a service. And that's about it. And
you leave the rest to whatever whatever kind of an option that can survive the free market
competition.
Okay, what you just described is a protection racket. What is that protection and protection
racket? Yeah. So that's when organized crime moves in and says that you have to pay for
our protection. Yeah. If you don't if you don't pay, your business will likely catch
on fire. Shame about that.
Yeah, I don't think there is any any way around that whatsoever. I think bigger you get bigger
share you have to pay to deal with bigger, bigger gangs, because your government is the
ultimate mafia. Yeah, exactly. So what's the what's the option? You don't think there's
any way around this? I think there is a way around the ethical arguments that we don't
need to have everything we can have certain amount of things to provide safety and happiness
and security and health and all of those things. But beyond that, it's it's a matter of greed.
If you want to go and deal with that, then there are people who are greedier than you
and they have bigger guns and bigger ammos and bigger, you know, more resources to take
away from you and from everyone else for their own sake. But I go back to 2001 Space Odyssey,
that the moment we have figured out how to use tools and weapons and anything, we use
that first to provide for ourselves. And then second to take it away from the competitor,
whoever that competitor might be, it just the nature of humanity. I don't believe that
if we don't have certain I just call them safety nets. If we don't have that, we're
just going to behave. I think people are as terrible as they are wonderful. And I think
if you're not protecting ourselves in different ways, there are people who are just going
to walk all over you because they have, again, bigger guns and more will and more ability
to take over your resources.
Well, I'm I don't doubt that you need physical protection from bad guys. I never did.
How do you implement that in as an alternative to to a nation as an alternative to a protection
racket? Fair enough. You could do it with a consortium of security forces that are all
either for profit or charities. Isn't that exactly the protection racket in a different
way? No, because they they don't tax you. They don't force you to pay for them. But
you still have to pay. Oh, you would likely pay somebody to protect you just like and
they can be overrun by a stronger force. That's always the case. Well, exactly. Like what
happened in Seattle? Were you following what happened in Seattle? You do need to have a
stronger force than people that invade you. Yeah, that's that's my whole point. I agree.
I don't think you have to run a protection racket to get that stronger force. So so rather
than have a government and all the huge financial burden that that encompass, you just you have
private company, you have private security forces and those private security forces are
part of a consortium that makes the rules and all the private companies pay into the
consortium to keep it going. Right. And if any of them breaks the rules, then they get
kicked out of the consortium. Well, who will own the nuclear weapons? Because they exist
right now already. That's what I'm talking about that right now. What are our options?
Because what happened in Seattle with respect to this can't change overnight. No, what would
you have to probably dismantle the nuclear weapons? Yeah, a period of decades. Exactly.
If not centuries. Yeah, it could be a long time. What happened in Seattle? I was actually
thinking about you because that's that's something we can talk. I think we we should move towards
wrapping this up. But that is something maybe we can talk next time that we come together.
But I was thinking about it because they started they call it Chaz as at first, which was Capitol
Hill Autonomous Zone. Yes, I remember Chaz. The first thing they did, they built a border
with walls. The second thing they did. Yeah, exactly. The second thing they did, they created
their own police force, beating people down, shooting people, interrogating them. And then
they changed their name to chop, which was Capitol Hill occupying protest, because they
thought of it, hey, if we're autonomous, how are we going to get water? How are we going
to get electricity? So I totally agree with you on the ethical and we had this conversation
before and the ethical sense of a way. But practically, I think it's never it's not going
to happen because of human nature, because we already have massive weapons already that
exists on this planet. And even if people that's one of the reasons I never agreed
with the Iran deal, Iran nuclear deal, I don't care how many paper they're going to sign
that they're going to, they're not going to build a nuclear bomb. If they can't build
a nuclear bomb, they're going to build a nuclear bomb. And for as long as this, which I think
is an inseparable part of human nature, that you just want to have more and more control
over resources. And that's why we progress. But at the same time, that that's why we cause
a lot of trouble for each other and pain. Because we, we are hardwired in just gathering
more and more and more and more without really knowing why do we need all of these stuff
and putting everybody and including ourselves into a bigger kind of problems and continuous
kind of problems. I mean, I mean, I genuinely like what David's saying. And I get it. And
I understand what you're saying that how do we get there? Maybe we can establish smaller
communities based on that principles. Or, yeah, sure. That's the way to do it is just
imagine dividing up every state into counties and every county into city states and get
smaller and smaller. Yeah, decentralized as decentralized as it gets. Yeah. And maybe
regions like the West Coast and the East Coast have more in common to function as an entity
than forcing the East West trade that the nation states but my concern and maybe the
solution lies in the fact that you said it a guy that we were totally dependent on government
now it is the ultimate as David says, it's the ultimate racket. I mean, every every aspect
of our life is controlled, we're told, you know, from, you know, you got to do this,
you got to wear a mask, you're going to have to have a vaccination, you got to do this.
You can't open this, you can't close that. I mean, it's been really clearly shown how
much the government puts on the table that you have to do. So I think, you know, the
FDA, the environmental agencies, for example, that I mean, no need, the agricultural agencies,
you know, subsidizing farmers, all that stuff, I think, it can be tossed by the wayside and
then you're left with initially, just military, the justice system. And, and then the policing
falls back to the lower municipalities. Yeah. And at that point, you move forward, right.
And I think there is also a deeper layer at the core of governments. And that's, I think,
they're worth discussing that United States government, its sole job is to protect the
US Constitution. And the rights in the US Constitution are not coming from the man,
it's coming from the God. Now, what kind of a God, who that God is, that's a different
kind of a story. But I think that's the whole point of American exceptionalism, that when
the First Amendment is providing and guaranteeing your free speech, that is not the right that
is given to you by man, that is your natural right that is recognized by this legal document.
And the job of the government of United States is to protect that, versus job of the Chinese
Communist Party government is the man setting all the laws and all the rules and everybody
else should follow them. And that is exactly going back to what Zizek said, that is a moment
of philosophy that has that is created right now this opportunity for all of us to discuss.
