Once you free your head, you can free your mind. It's really just
the first step, just just breaking off the shackles of the
hijab. And then a woman is allowed to start thinking and to
start feeling and to start being and to start just feeling like a
human being, you know, you can't even do that when you're still
shackled to this garb that forces you to just become the
image of a Muslim woman. You know, you don't have any
personal autonomy. You don't have any individuality. You are
just Muslim woman. That's it. That's how the world sees you.
That's how you see yourself.
Hello, and welcome to the 60th episode of a new human podcast.
I'm a Ghabha Hari, a geologist on Twitter and Instagram. And you
can follow this podcast on liveinlimbo.com, iTunes, YouTube
and BitChute. And with me today, I have Yasmeen Mohammed, and
welcome to Neo Human Podcast, Yasmeen.
Thank you very much for having me.
Absolute pleasure. You're one of those people that I've been
thinking about having for a long time, had ex Muslims before,
tried to get Ayaan Hirsi Ali number of times, complete failure
on that front. But you know, it's happening. It's happening.
So it's a pleasure to have you. Let's start with your
background for those of our audience who don't know who you
are, the work you've done, lives you've lived, and what are you
mainly focused on now these days?
Okay. So I grew up in a fundamentalist Muslim
household. I was forced into a marriage with an al-Qaeda agent,
got away from him. We had a daughter together. So I got my
myself and my daughter away from him.
Which country were you in?
Canada. This was all in Canada. Okay. Yeah. And then I started
going to university, took a history of religions course,
where I was finally allowed to talk about Islam and question
it and, you know, think critically about it. And so of
course, that led to me leaving the religion. And I was quietly
an ex-Muslim for a long time, because of course, you know, the
punishment for leaving Islam is execution. And so I lived like
that quietly for a long time until the infamous episode of
Bill Maher with Sam Harris and Ben Affleck, where they, Ben
Affleck called them gross and racist. And that sort of
encouraged me to start speaking up. I felt like I agreed with
everything that Sam and Bill had to say, but the two men were
being attacked. Basically, they're being attacked for being
white male Americans. So I said, you know, I'm going to say the
same thing as them, but I'm going to be a brown female Arab.
And so now people are going to be forced to address the actual
message that as opposed to just stopping and being, you know,
stuck on the identity of the messenger. And so then I decided
I was going to start writing my book. And so I started writing a
blog, first of all, and I was still anonymous at the time. So
the blog was called Confessions of an Ex-Muslim. And I started
getting messages from all over the Muslim majority world from
men and women that were very happy that I was speaking out,
and were asking me to basically be their voice. And then I
started to feel really ashamed that these are people that are
living in countries where they could be executed for speaking
out. And here I am living in the free West, afraid to show my
face. And so I decided to go public. And this was all about
three years ago, and I finally got my book published. And it is
called Unveiled, How Western Liberals Empower Radicalists
Islam. And what a title. What a title. Spot on. Sam helped me
with that. And then I also started an organization called
Free Hearts, Free Minds, which supports people who have left
Islam, but are still stuck in Muslim majority countries. So if
you go to that website and click on testimonials, you can read
from people who we have helped over the past year.
Now, we have a lot in common. I was born in Iran. We talked
about it briefly before coming live, that you would be interested
to know about my background as well. I was born in Iran, born
into a family that was marked as Shia Muslim, because their
parents were Shia Muslim, and their parents were Shia Muslim.
And therefore, I always say that I was one second old,
automatically it was, you know, the labels that were have placed
on me, I was a straight male Iranian Shia Muslim. And good
luck getting rid of any of those, because they come with
the expectations that are built within that society, not only
the theocracy, but also the society and the family
structure. And so when you mentioned Ben Affleck, one thing
that stands out is that how he mentioned that, well, I was
saying something like this, you're offending 1.7 billion
Muslims. But the idea that once you're born into this religion,
there is no way out of it, unless you're willing to risk
your life. And this is a very sinister aspect that is very
unique to Islam. Would you like to expand on that a little, that
this whole cynicism about what you can't really offend 1.7
billion people, but that 1.7 billion large club, it's
large club, includes millions of people who are more than
willing to leave, but they are not willing to risk their lives
or just give up all their family lives and everything, their
identity, basically.
That's exactly it. And so when he was stopping the criticism
of Islam, basically what he was doing is he was condemning
those people to stay under this ideologies tyranny. So he
should have been supporting freedom of thought. This is a
man who made a movie called Dogma where he's criticizing
the religion of Christianity. So he's very familiar with how
Dogma can be imposed on people against their will. And if
only he knew how many Muslim people across the Muslim
majority world would love to have their freedom of thought
and their freedom of conscience and just their freedom to live
for goodness sake. I mean, in their laws, they have Sharia,
which is based on Islam, which is 1400 year old ideology. So it
is suppressing the progress of these countries. The people
themselves are like, you know, people look at the government
and they assume that that's the people. People look at the
fundamentalist ideology of Islam and they assume that that's
the people but that's not true. Muslim people want to be free
just like Christian people want to be free and Jewish people
want to be free and Hindu people want to be free and
atheist people want to be free. Everybody just wants to be
free. And when, you know, when Ben was doing that, basically
what he was doing was literally, I'm gonna let you guys
we supposed to start a little earlier today. But you know,
that's the thing later in the day, we get a more energetic
dogs get until they fall asleep. But I was going to say that he
was literally proving the subtitle of my book, which is
western how western liberals empower radical Islam. He was
protecting radical Islam. He was protecting fundamentalist
Islam by stopping these men from speaking about liberalism
and all of the liberal Muslims and all of the reform Muslims
and all of the free thinking Muslims that are stuck under
that ideology that would have been very excited like I was at
the time, very excited and very happy to see this conversation
happening on mainstream media that these two men actually
cared about our plight and what was going on in our communities.
Yeah, absolutely. My biggest culture shock because I arrived
in Canada in 2006 as a refugee. I was human traffic through
five countries, you know, left Iran with a fabricated
password and my crime was that I was a heavy metal guitar
player who, you know, I got even permitted by something
in Iran called Ministry of Guidance and Islamic Culture
that you have to go and get permission if you want to do
anything cultural related, so music, books, movies, anything.
And I didn't get permission after the second time. So I
just continue doing it underground and then I was deemed
as corrupting the revolutionary youth. I will never forget
that charge. I'm corrupting the revolutionary youth by being
a heavy metal guitar player, then got a court summon, our
house got raided. It was just insane. So when I made it to
Canada, I always say that my biggest culture shock was how
people were treating Islam because in Iran, in my
environment, everybody were not only done with the theocracy,
they were done with Islam. They're done with the religion.
Like we don't want to have anything to do with it. Like
Persians have their own thing and all of that, but the way
that the Westerners, these white liberal privileged people
are like, no, you don't know what you're talking about.
You had the wrong experience. What is it about? Because
this is not the first time that Islamists and leftists are
coming together. We had the same thing before the Iranian
revolution. Iraq is experiencing the similar thing.
What is it about Islam and far left and leftism that they
come together, they make alliances against the West,
against capitalism, against America, and once they succeed,
they start eating each other and usually Islamists are the
more successful part of that because they're more willing
to kill. You know, their permission is coming from Allah.
It's not from the man.
Yeah, yeah, a much stronger ideology, a much more
established ideology. So yeah, and like you said, they're
the ones that are willing to kill as well. Yeah, you're
right. That is incredibly terrifying to know that that
kind of alliance has a history of repeating itself and you
can sort of see the writing on the wall here in the Western
world now, but I think, you know, I hope that enough of us
will make enough noise that it won't get as far over here, but
it's really important for us to not be complacent and to not
be apathetic and to not just trust that Western values are
going to prevail. You know, if we don't support our own
values, our values are fragile and new really in comparison
to Islamic values and we're not willing to kill people. You
know, it's not authoritarian, so it is very important, I think,
that we fail our in being proud of what we have accomplished
in being proud of Western values and progressive values
and things like feminism and LGBT quality and all of these
things that we've achieved. We have to celebrate ourselves
more and appreciate these things more as opposed to
constantly self-flagellating. So, you know, in the US, they're
very like in the First Amendment, it talks about free
speech. We know how important free speech is, but you can see
it being challenged all over the United States of America.
It's incredibly terrifying like people don't realize how
important these values are and how important it is for us to
defend them like really loudly. Instead, we're we're almost
like ashamed of our values. Yeah, and it just seems like
the double standard that is being practiced by a lot of
people on the left who, you know, they could be well
meaning, but you know what they say that the road to hell is
paved by good will, good meaning because when you look at a
country like Iran where people and this goes back to the title
of your book, Unveiled, which I want you to expand on that.
What was the experience of unveiling for you because
people don't realize it that someone like Ilhan Omar, I
actually commented under one of your posts on Twitter.
Absolutely recommend everybody to follow you on Twitter
because, you know, there's so much to learn right from the
source. Ilhan Omar, her initial claim to fame is being the
first congress person to wear a hijab, but there is no limit in
Congress of United States to wear a hijab. At the same time,
all of these feminists that goodness forbid you say
something negative about Ilhan Omar attack you as an
Islamophobe and a whatever, they are all silent about people
in Iran, women in Iran who are risking their lives just to
take their veil off and send the video to someone like
Masih Ali Najat and then they're attacking someone like
Masih Ali Najat. Oh, this is the instrument of Mike Pompeo
Trump. What is happening with this double standard that it
just so obvious, you know, ignorance is definitely not an
excuse in the age of social media and information and
explain to the audience if you will this weight of being veiled
as the matter of involuntary necessity for a lot of women
and a lot of girls who are coming from that culture. I
think that if they were honest with themselves, they would
immediately recognize and understand how, you know, like
the way you called it, the weight of the veil, how it's
literally like shackles being put on a person. I mean,
they're over here talking about free the nipple. They want to
have their freedom to wear whatever they want. They
understand the importance of personal autonomy. This isn't
like something that they don't understand, but what's
disgusting is how they don't value women on the other side
of the world as much as they value themselves and they think
that those women somehow, you know, find empowerment in
taking their personal autonomy away. You know, for them,
hijab is good, but not for me. No, no, no. For me, I get to
wear whatever I want, but for them, I will celebrate them
when they wear hijab and I will put it on the cover of
magazines and I'll be so proud of Ilhan Omar that she puts a
scarf on her head as if she has done something. Like you said,
you know, there are no restrictions against women in
America wearing hijab. It's not some act of bravery, but if
you really want to see acts of bravery, then you should look
to the women in Iran who when they remove their hijab, they
are thrown in prison for 10 years or more. That's where the
bravery is. Those are the people that we should be
supporting. If you're truly a feminist and you truly care
about women, then it's very easy to see which women need
your support and which women you should be standing behind,
but at best, those women are ignored and at worst, people
speak out against them like the way they're speaking out
against Massey now and they're calling her a mouthpiece for
Trump. Massey has been fighting this fight from before Trump
ever even entered politics when he was still doing reality TV.
It's such an insult to this woman who has devoted her
entire life to this cause to now call her a mouthpiece for
Trump. They don't care. It doesn't matter. They don't care
about the actual individuals. They don't care what they're
doing to Massey. They don't care that her brother has been
imprisoned by the Islamic regime because they can't
reach her. They don't care about the the more danger that
they're putting her and her family in. It doesn't matter to
them. They just wanna push their own agenda. So, it's the
same thing with the Iranian protesters right now that are
I mean, I can't even fathom the kind of bravery it takes for
you to go into the streets when you know that over a thousand
people have been killed on those same streets for protesting
in the exact same way that you are protesting today and
somehow they have this super human bravery to stand out
there and protest against this regime and what when that
happens the media that should be supporting them that should
be standing behind them. This should be for freedom and for
democracy and for liberty. They don't want to talk about it.
They don't wanna support them because they're afraid that
that might end up look like like it's supporting Trump. Who
cares about Trump? It is irrelevant. It doesn't matter.
You know, Trump only got involved in this whole thing
because Americans were involved in this whole thing,
right? That's the only time we saw American involvement,
right? He's the president of the United States. His job is
to take care of American citizens. Iranians don't, it
doesn't matter. It doesn't matter to Massey and it doesn't
matter to the protesters. It's just this narcissism that they
only see the world through what matters to them and their own
perspective and their own Trump derangement syndrome. It's so
on, you know, it's so against liberal values for you to be
choosing to stay quiet and to not support these people
fighting for freedom because you're too afraid that that
might make it look like, you know, you're wearing the wrong
color of the jersey that's supporting your political team.
Yeah, they're the very same people, the people who are
attacking Massey and saying that you're a mouthpiece of
Trump. They're the very same people who went along when
Clinton said that Tulsi Gabbard is a Russian agent. Yes. And
the perspective comes from, I keep bringing up the quote by
AOC when she said that it's more important to be morally
right than factually correct because that is such a obvious
direction that hey, morality as we define it, you have to
submit to it and it doesn't matter what facts is, which is
very similar to religion. That's Islam. I read that and I
was like, she's a fucking mullah. Well, they are
starting or they have started their own version of
fundamentalist religion. I had Peter Boghossian, we talked
about this as well and he agrees that it's a religion.
It's a secular religion. This does not make any sense if you
look at it from a political philosophy perspective. Make
all the sense if you look at it from the religious kind of a
perspective. Before getting into analyzing that though, I
want to hear your experience of being unveiled because I think
I saw one photo of you younger when you were wearing hijab,
but I assume that you've been you've been wearing hijab for
much longer than a couple of years. Yeah. Oh, yeah. So it
was put on me at nine years old and I wore hijab for about 20
years and then I wore or no less than 20 years. I wore it
until I was about 20 and then I wore niqab after that. So
that's the covering of the whole face, even my eyes.
Actually, even my eyes were covered because of the man that
I was married to was
even the eyes needed to be covered. Every inch of skin
needed to be covered according to him. So I looked through a
thin black veil. Basically, that's how I saw the world. So
other than the fact that it's the physical representation
of just the subjugation and the dehumanization, the gender
apartheid, it is all of those things. It is just the
symbol. It's the tool actually. So it's like if you see a
slave and they have shackles on them, you know that the
shackles are just the visual representation of the fact that
this person is a slave. It's if you remove those shackles,
it's the first step for that person to start to find their
own personal freedom and their own personal autonomy. So
really that's what the hijab is. It confines a person in the
same way that shackles can find a slave. It restricts you. I
mean, I talk about the niqab as a personal, it was like a
sensory deprivation chamber, a portable sensory deprivation
chamber where it it reduced my ability to hear, to see, to
speak, to touch, to you know, every every one of my senses,
every one of my everything that makes me human and my ability
to interact and communicate with other humans. All of that
was taken away from me. I didn't even feel like I was part
of humanity. I felt like I was a ghost walking amongst people.
You know, I could see them, but they couldn't see me. I wasn't
part of the world and it's really difficult to explain
what that does to somebody, but essentially, I was rotting
under that cloth. I my my body and soul were rotting under
there and the reason why I fight against the hijab so much
is because not only in my experience, but in so many
women's experiences, I say that you know, you once you free
your head, you can free your mind. It's really just the
first step. Just just breaking off the shackles of the hijab
and then a woman is allowed to start thinking and to start
feeling and to start being and to start just feeling like a
human being. You know, you you can't even do that when you're
still shackled to this garb that forces you to just become
the image of a Muslim woman. You know, you don't have any
personal autonomy. You don't have any individuality. You are
just Muslim woman. That's it. That's how the world sees you.
That's how you see yourself and you know, you just to me, it
was like, you know, I'm trying to explain to my friends what
it feels like and it's like, okay, imagine if you're an emo
and you just want to wear black eyeliner and a black cloak,
but you're forced to wear a pink tutu and have frills in
your hair and stuff like it's it's everybody who looks at
you is going to think, oh, look at this little ballerina and
you're like, I'm not a fucking ballerina. Stop judging me, but
you just you're you're giving that impression out to the
whole world and it's so against who you are on the inside and
it's it's just the most. It's just the most effective way of
constricting and constraining both your body and your mind.
Yeah, and the moment you take it off, you know, the closest
people to you start calling you, I don't know, prostitute and
whore and so the idea is very clear to make women into sexual
objects because that's that's the worth of woman from the
perspective of I would say religiously enabled societies
because the kind of hijab differs from the culture to
culture, right? Like Afghanistan have their own
thing. Indonesia have their own thing. Some Muslim women in
Lebanon and Turkey, they're not even wearing anything and so
because of what it represents, the argument of me and a lot of
people like me is that if Mirab or Burka is allowed to be worn
in public places, so should be KKK hoods and Nazi paraphernalia
because you know it represents as you said, it's not just this
thing that people put on their head. It's being placed on
their head to represent something, but we seem to be as
you said very very far from really practicing and
appreciating the First Amendment of the United States.
The hypocrisy is just unbelievable. I mean people are
lining up in Washington DC to wear US flag as the hijab not
really realizing what what it symbolizes. That I'm not even
American and that makes me want to throw up. Yeah, I get so
upset disgusted overseeing that you you're taking a symbol of
freedom of liberty. People have you know how many lives have
been lost over fighting for this freedom and you're taking
that symbol and you're just you're you're defacing it by
forcing it into the most polar opposite of freedom. You know
it's the most disgusting possible thing that they could
have done with the American flag. Absolutely. Well, I mean
people behind it like Linda Sarsour and all those people
there. It's clear where they're coming from. It's just a lack
of education whether intentionally or
unintentionally of a lot of people in the left who seem to
have welcomed a lot of people like Linda Sarsour to energize
their base and again, you know it has precedent that you lose
control and as you said, Islamists are coming from far
more firm and solid ideologically speaking place
than the leftists. So, it's an unwitting kind of a battle and
unwitting kind of a war which begs the question. What do you
think is going to happen with the future of Islam and Muslims
in the western world because people are waking up in the
west and they're not buying into a lot of bullshit that has
been coming to them from relatively speaking limited
channels of interpretation and distribution of information.
That's really well said. So, those limited channels were
basically like the Muslim Brotherhood, right? They had the
money. They had the ability. They were able to create people
like Linda Sarsour who was able to gain prominence because
the Obama administration gave her some White House champions
of change award. Do you know what I mean? So, they were able
to control the narrative for so long and now there are voices
like yours and mine that cannot be held back anymore because
we're on Twitter. We're on YouTube. We're on social media.
We don't have to be on MSNBC. We don't need to be you know to
get a call from BBC or CNN. We can get our voices out there in
different ways. So, they no longer have a monopoly on that
narrative anymore. So, we can come out and we can start to
give a counter narrative to what they've been hearing this
whole time. So, they've been hearing things like you know,
Islam is a religion of peace. That's a very hard thing to
sell when you guys you know like how do you sell Islam is a
religion of peace when you're going around stabbing people on
every bridge in London or your trucks of peace are are running
over people or you're killing each other in Iraq and in Syria
like or the Yazidis being taken as sex slaves and all that with
the the the truth coming out in the media, it's making people
start to question this narrative that they've been fed
and that they've swallowed for so long and when they start to
question and they start to look for answers, that's when they
find people like us and so that's why I think that what
we're doing is really valuable in changing that narrative and
in shifting that Islamist perspective to more of an honest
perspective of what it's like in the Muslim world. So, people
like Linda Sarsour are is you know, she's the kind of person
who would sell the garbage of the hijab means empowerment and
the hijab means feminism, right? And so, now, you're
going to have we have no hijab day and we have free from hijab
and you have women in Iran that are risking their lives and
putting the hijab on a stick and going to prison and all of
that stuff is countering the garbage that they have been
feeding people for so long and so, I think that at the end of
the day, just rational minded people and truth will prevail.
Yeah, the big picture ideal seems to be for Islam, the
doctrine of Islam to be reformed but we know that Islam
is also unique in that respect that it is said that it is the
final world of word of god and it cannot be reformed and it's
it's very sinister and very genius in that respect that
they put it that they this is it. It's not like no other
religion came after Islam, you know, it's just that anybody
that they could, they killed for this religion to have
monopoly on this. So, the question would be because Islam
cannot be reformed in a fundamental kind of a way and
because there is an awakening especially within the Muslim
communities, you know, it's not only Iran. I was reading that
Arabic translation of the God Delusion by Richard Dawkins,
what 10,000 times downloaded or a million times downloaded in
Saudi Arabia or something like that. So, you know, because
truth is is uncompromising, you know, when you hear it, it
resonates with you. You can struggle with it. You don't have
to sell it. You're not selling the truth. It's just the
truth. It's easy. It's it's it's the truth. So, what's going
to happen with this? I ask Salman this question to you that
the dynamic between Westerners and Muslims, what is going to
happen moving forward because it's not that people are going
to respect, hey, are we going to call you an Islamophobe? So,
you're going to shut the **** up because people have seen
people like me and you being called Islamophobe and racist
and then we talk about it like what the hell are you talking
about Islam? What does that even mean Islamophobe? So, what
do you see is going to happen between the dynamic between
Islam and the Western culture because there are a lot of
Muslims in the West, some believers, many not believers
and Islamists are taking advantage of this imbalance
between really knowing about what Islam is and between the
ideals the leftists have created for the Western
civilization. Well, I mean, I may be an eternal optimist but
I actually see Islamists losing their foothold. It may be
top down but we are greater in number and Islam may not ever
be reformed. I agree with you but I think Muslims will choose
to cherry pick their religion and they will choose to follow
only the parts of the religion that match their values. So,
they they will start to ignore all of the sexist verses and
all of the racist verses or all of the just scientifically
stupid verses like, you know, the the the earth is as flat as
a carpet and all of those things. They're gonna ignore
all that stuff. Sure, there's people in Saudi Arabia today
drinking camel urine but generally, Muslims ignore those
kinds of verses like we're already ignoring a lot of the
stupid things in the religion. So, we're just gonna continue
doing that. I think and you can see it, you know, some mosques
are starting up where they're LGBT safe. Some women are
saying, I wanna be an imam and I wanna read the Quran. You
know what I mean? Like, they're pushing the envelope in all
sorts of different ways and I fully and completely support
them but you know, unfortunately, you can only see
those kinds of things happening in the western world where
people have the freedom to to do these things. Still, under
dictatorships, under Sharia countries, you don't see those
changes happening quite as much. Well, quite as publicly
because there's so much more danger in doing that. So, I
think what the western world needs to do is to support
people that are trying to separate mosque and state. So,
our biggest responsibility now in the west is to support the
Iranian protest protesters who are trying to bring down the
Islamic regime. That is where we should be. 100% behind them
and behind people in Sudan who want democracy and behind
people in Egypt who want democracy and behind people in
Iraq who want democracy. In the past, unfortunately, you know,
not only in Iran but in in Egypt as well, the west has
always supported the fundamentalist Muslim
governments to come in and we need to stop doing that. We
need to start supporting democratic governments. We
need to start supporting the people when they want their
freedom and I think that's hopefully that's the shift. I
think what's happening in Iran right now is so incredibly I
mean, it's both really sad and heartbreaking and angering but
at the same time, it's just awe inspiring and it really as
they say, you know, sometimes things have to get worse before
they can get better. I've always said, you know,
especially about Iranian women that they're just superhuman
like it's phenomenal. I don't even know where they're like
Amazonian. I can't even I can't fathom their bravery, you
know, and so I feel like they are going to be the ones to
start this trend and to start, you know, if you can if you can
topple the Islamic regime in Iran, anything after that is
easy. So, if they can do it and people around the Islamic world
see them do it, they're going to feel like our job is going to
be so much easier if they did it, we can do it too and I
think that's kind of what happened with me and people like
Salman Rushdie and Ayaan Hirsi Ali and a lot of other ex
Muslims is we saw like if Salman Rushdie can do it or if
Ayaan Hirsi Ali can do it, then I can do it too. Of course, I
didn't have somebody, you know, stab a death threat into
another person's body, a death threat against me. You know
what I mean? Like it and she still is out there and she's
still writing books and she's still speaking. So, it gives
you hope in human resilience and human spirit and you feel
like, you know, like they say, you can't be what you cannot
see. So, I think that we're all going to look to Iran as that
example and I hope that it will continue to topple the Islamic
governments and it will continue this trend of
separation of mosque and state and then just once the people
are free, I mean, the world just is just going to it's such a
it's going to be such a gift, the art and music and talent
and just all of the the the the intellect and the amazing minds
that have been suppressed and not part of the world. It's all
going to come out and it's it's going to be, you know, I hope I
live to see it. Yeah, same here and it really comes down to
free flow of information, right? Even here, you see
someone like Kamala Harris suggests that Twitter shut down
Donald Trump's account. Well, why is she saying that? She's
saying that to shut down an argument that disagrees with
her and if they can't remove president of the United States,
they can't remove anyone else who disagrees with them and
this way of thinking has been unfortunately institutionalized
in Iran for the past over 40 years. Not that Shah was all,
you know, bright and everything because anything that happens
is a consequence of the process that's, you know, that's
been going on for far longer. Yasmeen's book is called
Unveiled How Western Liberals Empower Radical Islam. We talked
a lot about the US but we haven't talked about Canada.
You live in Canada. I lived in Canada for 11 years. I cannot
stand liberals and Trudeau. I spent maybe about a year
campaigning against liberals and Trudeau and try to explain
in any shape or form I could that this is not about racism.
This is not about the we don't like diversity and all of that.
This is about these people are destroying a country for the
sake of legitimacy that they do not have. So, how do you see it
with respect to liberals and Trudeau? Oh, I 100% agree with
you. I've also spoke. I speak out against Trudeau all the
time. It's so much now that I'm actually like I'm just sick of
him. Yes, I can't even hear his voice. I can't see his face. I
don't even want to talk about him anymore because I'm so
disheartened that he became the prime minister again. Like I
used to speak out against him a lot more before but now
it's almost like I'm in this state of denial. Like I don't
even want to believe that that he's still our prime minister.
It's it's everything that you said but it's also ironic that
these same people that are afraid that we are the ones us
with our brown skin from our Middle Eastern background that
we are the ones that you have to fear that we might be racist
and that we might be bigoted against Muslims. Meanwhile,
this **** is the one that's been in blackface three times.
You know what I mean? Like he's the one who you should be
worried about racism from. The fact of the matter is people
like Justin Trudeau do not care about human beings. They only
care about votes. So, if he's gonna support secular Muslims
or ex-Muslims, that's a very small group but if he's gonna
support fundamentalist or conservative Muslims, that's a
much larger voting block and that's all it comes down to
for him. He could give less of a **** about feminism. He's
pretending to be a feminist. He is how is he a feminist yet at
the same time, he's selling arms to Saudi Arabia. What do
you think Saudi Arabia is gonna do with those people? Yeah,
look how they're killing everybody in Yemen and and then
that he takes selfies with the refugees that he has created,
right? It's just on the campaign trail. He is as fake and as
shallow and as just like the quintessential disgusting
politician. I have absolutely nothing positive to say about
him. In the past, I used to think that he was just dumb but
you know, it's kind of like what you said at the beginning
of this this interview when you talked about the road to hell
is paved with good intentions. That ignorance, the fact that
he's so dumb is so dangerous when he is the leader of a
country. So, I can't even just dismiss him as an idiot
anymore because he is an incredibly dangerous idiot and
you know, just the way he's been reacting now with the
protesters in Iran that just solidifies, you know, my
disgust for him. It it his response was of no surprise to
me and I'm just ashamed. I'm ashamed that that he is the
leader. I'm ashamed that he became the leader again and to
be perfectly honest, I think it has a lot to do with the fact
that our conservative government just did not offer
the right counterweight to Trudeau. So, in the same way
where, you know, people in the US were saying about Hillary,
they're like, how horrible of a person does she have to be to
lose to Trump? It's the same thing about Trudeau. Like how
bad did Scheer have to be to lose to Trudeau? Nobody liked
him. Yep. But you know, in Canada, we have everybody is
left. We have left more left and even more left. Those are
our parties, you know, and so even our conservatives are
left. Our conservative party is more left than Bernie Sanders
for goodness sake. So, we're already far off the scale but
what happened with our conservative government is that
they did not stand up strong for Western and liberal values.
They didn't do that. Unfortunately, the conservative
governments before them did do that. So, under Stephen Harper,
he had he was very clear. He had a hotline where he created
the hotline for people to speak out and to call, you know, if
you're being forced into a marriage, FGM, he called it like
barbaric acts, you know, things like that. You call this hotline,
you ask for help, you get support for the women under
these regimes, you know, not just Islamic but whether it's
Sikh or Hindu or whatever else. If you feel like you're being
forced into a situation that you don't wanna be in, here is
an anonymous hotline that you can make this phone call and
you can get some support. Trudeau came in and he removed
that hotline and when whereas Harper in the past would talk
about, you know, FGM wasn't allowed in candidates against
the law. It's a barbaric act. You have Trudeau coming in and
saying, oh, cutting a girl's genitals with a razor. We don't
wanna call that barbaric. That's that's a terrible word to
use. Well, if you don't call that barbaric, then what is
barbaric? What could possibly be more barbaric than that? And
who would call it barbaric if it's not the Prime Minister of
Canada? Yes, that's right. So, it's just like we should have,
we needed a stronger conservative government that
looked to the Canadian people and said, we will defend your
values. We will defend, you know, freedom of speech, LGBT
equality. That was a big thing because our conservative
leader wouldn't go to any pride parades and and he was
talking about abortion and stuff like that. Like these are
not conversations in Canada. They might be conversations in
the US. They are not conversations in Canada.
Everybody is way beyond. You know, we believe in LGBT
equality across the board and to have somebody running for
Prime Minister who was wishy washy on that topic. It was
detrimental to him. Yeah, not only they didn't stand up for
Western values, they jeopardize them because yes, Salim Mansoor
I think is a very good example how this is a Muslim
professor who has been talking against Islamic radicalism and
all that and he wanted to run as a conservative but he got
kicked out because they're like, oh, there's a threat of us
being called Islamophobic because of Salim Mansoor and he
joined People's Party of Canada, which I believe is a
populist party. I voted for them not because of any specific
kind of a person for the kind of principles that they're
talking about because no one else is talking about freedom
of speech and it's incredibly important when the other side
of the argument is saying we have to regulate social media.
I'm not saying that they're going to be successful doing
that, but it's the perspective that hey, it's a monopoly on
the narrative and that is being determined by the left. It
just it doesn't seem to be very sustainable and to the credit
of majority of Canadian people, I think it's important to say
that liberals won the smallest minority in history of Canada
with less than 33%, which shows what a messed up electoral
system Canada has that I was watching it live. You know,
they went through maybe three province, four provinces in the
east and oh, okay, this is the power dynamic. This is who's
in charge. So what about the west? No wonder they want to
split, you know, that always. Yeah, I live in the west coast
and yeah, that's that's always the way it is. You're in
Vancouver, right? Yeah. Oh, that's a beautiful place. I
lived in Vancouver for a year and a half. I went to Vancouver
film school studied sound design. Yeah, but it's been
like more than half of my school year experimenting with
psychedelics. Yeah, and we have a lot of that here too. Yeah,
that was very helpful for me though, because you know, I got
from the place of anything that has anything to do with
religion is awful to be able to look at churches and even mosque
and separate the architectural and artistic values from the
ideological aspect of it. This is very helpful to me and you
know, I think people in the Middle East, they need acid and
mushrooms more than yeah. Yeah, they need to be removed from
that for a while to get that fresh perspective because it's
easier for I mean, I went through the same thing you're
describing. I mean, I didn't have any psychedelics to help
me, but it went through the same process of just I I hated
the sound of the language Arabic. I didn't want to hear
it. I didn't want to see Arab people. I didn't want to eat
Arab food. I wouldn't even eat Greek food because it was
similar to Arabic food like I ended up lumping the whole Arab
culture in with Islam and just making it one in the same and
that was unfair. You know now over so much time, I've been
able to gain a perspective and appreciation for Arabic music
again and Arabic culture minus all of the religious stuff, but
yeah, it takes a long time. It's almost like it's triggering.
It's almost like PTSD. You know as soon as you see that stuff,
you're like no fuck it fuck all of it like you just don't
want any of it in your life, but I think that people in the
Middle East are so immersed in it. So their hate is a lot
more visceral right now, but if they can just be removed from
it for a while, then they can start to appreciate you know
the value that it can bring minus all of that garbage.
You're lucky in Iran that you have that you've sustained your
Persian culture right like my family is from Egypt. They call
themselves Arabs like it's called the Arab Republic of
Egypt. What the fuck does it have to do? It's in Africa.
It has nothing to do with Arabs. They lost the language,
the religion, the culture. The only thing we know about Egypt
is the stuff that the British people care about with the
ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics and stuff like that. Egyptians
themselves don't care about any of that. They don't value
anything to do with their real culture. You know in Morocco,
you can see a little bit of the Berber stuff that has still
been upheld, but so many countries have lost their
pre-Islamic culture and it's you know I'm just saying Iran
like you guys are lucky that you have been able to to
sustain it somewhat so you have something else that's
beautiful about your country that has nothing to do with
Islam. Yeah and a lot of people you know have died trying to
preserve that culture and a lot of people. Iran is a very
very nationalist kind of a country. I sometimes have this
conversation with people here that even whatever you want to
call racism or nationalism in a negative aspect of it that is
very alive and well in Iran as a mainstream, but perhaps that
element is something that has preserved the Iranian culture
because this is funny actually when Trump was talking about
having 52 targets, including cultural targets in Iran. This
was brought up that one of Khomeini loyalists, Khal Khali,
he wanted to bowl those down person after the success of the
revolution and people lined up in front of it held hands so
they couldn't do it. So definitely nationalism and a
lot of these Islamists within the Islamic Republic regime
like Ahmadinejad people they are trying to take this Iranian
nationalism and mix it with Shiism to create something new
out of it because they understand that this version of
Shiism theocracy this is done like people not buying into it
at all, but we'll see what's going to happen. It's a sad
state of affair in Iran, but hey, as you said people need to
do what they need to do the way that they need to do it. I am
not in favor of any kind of a war or Western intervention
yet. I'm absolutely in favor of US coming out of the nuclear
deal. I mean, how are you going to deal with the Islamic
regime? They're liars. You know you cannot trust them, but in
unique time unique times to be alive and having our
perspective really. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yasmeen's book is called
Unveiled How Western Liberals Empower Radical Islam. What is
next for you and where can our audience follow your work? So
right now, I am going all across Canada, US, Australia,
Europe, some parts of Asia even promoting my book. So I'll be
if people go to my website yasmeenmuhammad.com and they
subscribe to my newsletter, then they can see where I'll be and
when and then hopefully they can come out and see me and
support and get a signed copy of my book and the other thing
that I'm working on is my organization Free Hearts Free
Minds, which is all about supporting people from the
living in the Muslim world who have left Islam and we're
always looking for donations so people are interested in going
to that website and taking a look at the testimonials and
seeing how we've helped people. That would be fantastic and
you can find me on Twitter where I'm usually pretty active
and yeah. Your Twitter handle is at yasmeenmuhammadxx. I've
put it under your name so our audience can see it. This was
awesome having you. Thank you so much for your time. Let me
ask you the last question that I ask all my guests that if you
come across an intelligent alien from a different
civilization, what would you say is the worst thing humanity
has done and what would you say is humanity's greatest
achievement?
The worst thing we have done is up for debate. I think we've
done a lot of horrible things, but I think that our best
achievement is that we continue to move forward that no matter
how bad things are, we generally are always moving
forward. We don't consistently move forward like sometimes we
take one step back, but I think in general, I have a lot of
faith in humanity and our resilience and I think that's
the best thing about us is that we're still willing to
persevere.
Thank you.
