There's always this problem of, like, what do we do with trance states and what do they
have to do with religion?
In a way, they feed religion, they allow religion to get going, and then once religion's going,
it kind of needs, it sort of needs them to keep going, but then it also has to control
them because they're, they're freaky, they'll undermine your perspective, they'll turn you
into a mystic.
It's like, I don't need a priest, I talk to God.
Hello and welcome to the 52nd episode of Neo Human Podcasts, I'm Agabahari, an agologist
on Instagram and Twitter, and you can follow the show on LiveInLimbo.com, iTunes, and YouTube
as well as BitChute.
And today with me, I have a pleasure of having Eric Davis.
You have a new book called High Weirdness, Drugs, Esoterica, and Visionary Experience
in the 70s.
Tell us a little about your book, High Weirdness, and what made you write High Weirdness at
this time?
I've been interested in these guys for a long time, particularly Philip K. Dick.
I wrote my senior thesis in the 1980s at Yale on Philip K. Dick at a time when nobody was
really paying attention to him, you know, a few science fiction scholars, but he wasn't
famous.
I mean, people knew about Blade Runner, but they thought about the film, they didn't really
care that much about Philip K. Dick, it was before there were a lot of movies made based
on his work, before he sort of had a revival in the 1990s, and I was kind of part of actually
making that revival happen because I wrote a lot about him in the late 80s and 1990s.
So I've been wrestling with Dick's work for a long, long time, and initially this project
was just going to be about him and his so-called religious experience in 1974, these series
of remarkable, quasi-paranormal, quasi-psychotic, quasi-mystical events that happened to him
and really conditioned the last part of his life and his work.
All of his final writings are in some way relating to these series of experiences.
And so I had been able to work on some of his writings at that time, and particularly
he wrote this enormous private diary called The Exegesis, where he called The Exegesis,
and this was not published during his life and nor really intended to, but it remained
afterwards and I was part of the team that helped edit that into something.
So I'd been working with Dick's work for a long time, and I was thinking about this
experience, how do we talk about psychotic-slash-occult-slash-religious experiences, especially in the
era of the 1970s, which I think is a really significant era.
We can talk a little bit more about that later because I think it relates to today in some
really, really important ways.
But I was also just always interested in the era, and so I started thinking about how can
I tell Dick's story against the backdrop of the 1970s, and as I was doing that, I realized
that there were other people who went through not terribly dissimilar kinds of experiences
in different situations, and I decided to choose two of those, Terrence McKenna and
Robert Anton Wilson, and compare and contrast, although I ended up doing less of that than
I had hoped to.
I ended up just providing different accounts of these three guys.
But again, they had very interestingly similar experiences.
There were elements of science fiction, of cybernetics, of futurism, as well as religious
and occult imagery, the paranormal, and also a kind of ambiance of gutter culture, of a
sort of underground ferment.
Have they ever ended up meeting up, Philip K. Dick with Terrence McKenna?
Bless you.
Thank you.
Did I meet them?
No, no, no, have they ever ended up meeting each other, Philip K. Dick and Terrence McKenna?
They actually all knew each other.
I don't believe that Terrence, no, Terrence did not meet P.K.D., P.K.D. did meet Robert
Anton Wilson, but they were aware of each other's work, like P.K.D. wrote about The
Invisible Landscape, the book that Terrence wrote with his brother Dennis in 1975.
He wrote about that in the exegesis and in some of his letters.
So he was familiar with their ideas, and then Terrence later on, again, fairly early in
the revival of Dick, there was an early kind of set of excerpts from the exegesis that
was published called In Pursuit of Valles, and Terrence wrote an introduction to that
where he was basically saying, what happened to Dick was what happened to me?
The same thing happened, because he wanted to sort of make the connection, whereas Robert
Anton Wilson, even though again there are these similarities, he was like, well, there's
some similarities between me and Dick, but a lot of differences too, which is more of
a kind of Robert Anton Wilson way of approaching it, because he's such a pluralist, he recognizes
all these kind of different kind of things that are going on in any given situation.
And the experiences that P.K.D. had, were they with any specific kind of hallucinogenic
or it was across the board, he was just experimenting with different kind of drugs and had different
kind of experiences?
No, that's actually a good question, because in many ways, it happened sort of outside
of the direct context of drugs.
Now, in the 1960s, Philip Dick did try LSD and Mescaline, there's a handful of experiences,
and they were important to him, he referred to them, some of them were quite nightmarish,
and some of them definitely anticipated some of his 70s experiences and the imagery, you
know, he had a famous early trip where he ends up speaking Latin, and intoning these
terms from a Bach piece, and these sort of set up some of the Christian themes that come
up in his later religious experience, but he was mostly a speed user, starting in the
late 1950s, but really ramping up in the early 1960s, carrying through the whole decade,
like lots and lots of brain damaging amounts of speed, but by the early 1970s, he went
through a kind of almost a kind of death and rebirth thing, he bottomed out in Canada and
wound up in a rehab clinic, a really intense rehab clinic, and after that point, he kind
of turned his back on the counterculture, he didn't stop taking everything, I think
he still smoked weed sometimes, and you know, he may have had one or two psychedelic trips
that just kind of fell in there, but he kind of was out of that intense drug culture, it
had been for a number of years when these experiences happened, so you could say, well,
he was already brain damaged, but frankly, the thing about Dick is that if you go back
into his biography, his early biography particularly, he was always non-neurotypical, I mean, he
had a different reality, you know, he was wrestling with psychological symptoms, were
they psychotic, were they paranoid, were they schizophrenic, who knows, because all of those
things are moving targets, and he was diagnosed really early, he started to see shrinks when
he was very young, he started to take psychiatric drugs when he was very young, he took tons
of psychiatric drugs, so he was always a sort of mix of unpredictable psychological
symptoms and drugs, legal and illegal, and you know, whatever, so it's very hard to say
where drugs stopped and Philip K. Dick started, but at the same time, it's really important
to emphasize that unlike McKenna and Robert Anton Wilson, who are both very consciously
taking large doses of psychedelics in order to see how far out they could get, Dick was
not doing that, he was not experimenting that way, in fact, if anything, he was taking massive
doses of vitamin C because he thought that was going to do something, and maybe it did,
who knows, so he was kind of a druggy guy, but he wasn't like pedal to the metal on the
actual substance use at the time that he had these experiences.
You know, it's like what they're saying that the difference between insanity and genius
is so thin and blurry that sometimes people can't really tell the difference between the
two.
I mean, Dick is a better example of that than anyone, in my view, even his books, like his
greatest books, there's something a little fractured about them.
The writing isn't completely smooth all the way through, there's this sort of frenetic
energy and sometimes there's these jump cuts and you're like, where did that come from
or some rough elements in them, and so I kind of feel like one of the great things about
reading Dick is that you get to sort of enter into a mind that has an element in it that
is psychosis or that is sort of, you know, mentally unstable and yet he not only compensates
for it, but he kind of weaves it into his story, you know, on this sort of deeper level
and you're kind of with him as he's processing it personally and telling all these amazing
stories, and these stories just came from his head, like just, you know, he just could
spew them out, you know, he wrote most of his books, which are pretty intensely plotted,
there's multiple characters, the plots don't always quite hold up, but they're very dense
and woe-enriched, and he wrote most of his early books in one sitting, he just sat down
and like had a bunch of notes, some ideas, and he would just boom, boom, boom, boom, boom,
sometimes in a week or two weeks, like a whole book, so he had an unusual capacity to tell
stories and to weave together networks of characters in a way that I think is really
singular and quite brilliant, and yet there's a way in which his brilliance is woven into
his psychosis, which some of his less good books, you can almost feel it, it's not just
that they're not very well written, it's that you're kind of in the presence of some
process that's unnerving to you and the author.
Different kind of context, I guess.
Yeah, yeah, for sure.
We are talking to Eric Davis, it's a pleasure to speaking with him, he has a new book called
High Weirdness, Drug, Soterica, and Visionary Experience in the 70s, and it's been published
by the MIT Press.
You mentioned that you want to talk more about, less about summary of your book because you've
been doing it for a while now, the book came out in June or July, and I found it really
interesting that you mentioned you would be interested to talk about how has your experience
has been talking about the book on different kind of setups, on different kind of podcasts.
Would you like to talk a little about that?
Yeah, yeah, sure.
It's actually been more illuminating than I thought it would be.
If you talk about a project you did, often time it gets a little like, oh yeah, I'm telling
the same story, and I didn't want to just keep telling the same story, so I started
to go into what was maybe a deeper interest on mine, what was it about the 1970s that
really interested me, and initially I would talk about, I was born in the 60s, so I kind
of, the 1970s is the first sort of cultural era that shaped me.
I remember things about the early 1970s when I was a little kid, and certain records my
parents had, and television commercials, and pop music, and stuff from that era, so it's
always really interested me, particularly the kind of dark spookiness, because it's
a very strange time in American history, and throughout the world in a lot of ways, but
definitely in American history, because it was kind of the first major bummer era of
America, which is sort of pathologically optimistic, at least until recent decades, and the 70s
was the first real like, wow, this is a bummer, and so I was really interested in that period,
but as I talked about the book, I realized that a lot of ways what interested me was
the similarities between that era and our era today, that if we look back in American
history and go, where is a time that we're going to find some of the same concerns, and
fears, and obsessions, and fantasies, and paranoias, and the same sort of psychic ambiance
that we have today, what's the closest to where we are, is definitely the 1970s, and
particularly the early 1970s, you know, strong degree of social polarization, there were
worries about the environment, and energy, and pollution, there was the terrorist became
a really significant figure with all of the hijackings, that was the kind of dominant
form of terrorism, as well as some of the bloodier gangs in America, and other places
where people were actually dying, and in some ways it was a lot more frightening, because
there was more, even more domestic terrorism than there is today, albeit from left, from
the left, rather than from the right, which is what we have today, and there was also
just kind of a cultural malaise, there was a sense of drifting, of being unsure, as well
as a degree of paranoia, some of our great films of paranoia are from the early 1970s,
like the parallax view, or the conversation, and anybody watching these films, even though
the technology is all analog, and it's not always about technology, it's about politics
too, anyone watching today would feel like a similar kind of like creeping suspicion,
that there's sort of dark shadow behind us, watching us, shaping us, that kind of sense
of paranoia that is partly related to conspiracy theory, the 70s was also a big period for
conspiracy theory, and indeed, that's what Robert Anton Wilson's, in some ways his most
famous book is about, in 1975, he published this book called Illuminatus, that had been
written over the previous five or six years, from the late 60s on, and it's this big satirical
romp, it's this funny, messy, goofy, pulp fiction, brilliant exegesis, just this mishmash
book, but the driving themes of it, are sort of the idea that all conspiracies are true,
and the main conspiracy is about the Illuminati, who again, feature heavily in today's conspiracy
stories, and he was sort of taking the piss out of it, but he was also kind of getting
into it, and indeed, the book has a weird quality, and I mean that term specifically,
that it kind of looks like a satire, he's just making fun of stuff, he's just having
fun as a writer, with his writing partner Robert Shea, they co-wrote the book, but you
can also kind of tell he started getting into it, and he's starting to recognize that there's
real similarities between, let's say, thinking about conspiracies, and thinking in terms
of the occult, or mysticism, and it's no accident that today, both conspiracy theory and occultism,
including astrology, and you know, psychic healing, and all this kind of stuff, is on
the rise again, because there's something about when you enter difficult political periods,
some of these stories become more salient, they become more powerful, and so, as I was
talking about high weirdness over the months, and I had all these great conversations, and
a lot of interest in podcast land, it's a very satisfying thing as a writer these days,
if you put out a book that's interesting, even if it doesn't sell that well, or doesn't
get any recognition from the mainstream, there's usually a whole world of people who are interested
in it, so you get to talk about it, and meet readers that way, and you know, it's a wonderful
thing about the podcast ecology, which to my mind is one of the most positive hopeful
things in our current kind of information environment, but anyway, as I was talking
about this stuff over the months, I became, I started to talk more and more about contemporary
politics in our contemporary situation, like it was less about, oh, let's go back to the
70s and enjoy all these specific details, I mean, that's all in the book, and anybody
who's interested in that period would get a lot out of just the general discussion of
that era, but my own shift is to sort of recognize how relevant these things are today, and I'll
give you one example that was really a nice confirmation.
The current issue of New York Magazine, and if you're listeners, it's worth it to open
up the image.
I'm showing it to them right now.
Oh, great.
Yeah.
The weirdness is coming, so one, they use the term, and we haven't talked about the
term weirdness now, but let's do it next, but I'll bookmark it for now.
The weirdness is coming.
It's about the next 10 years, and it's prediction, like kind of futurism, but not in sort of
that usual kind of technocratic way of saying, oh, in the future, we'll have these kinds
of new technologies and new problems as well.
Instead, it's like, whoa, things are about to get really weird, guys, like you're going
to be afraid of the wind, and malls are going to become massive interactive theme parks,
weird, or actually, we're not really science fiction people.
We're increasingly becoming medieval peasants who don't own anything, and we're like these
digital serfs, and so it's a little more fantastic.
It talks about how science fiction is going to be hard to write because we're going to
be living it, but even more than the fact that they're using weirdness to talk about
the future and the kind of weirdness of the future, not just its scariness or its problems,
but that quality of the weird, which is sort of unnerving, it's kind of mystical, it's
not really rational, it's poetic, it has a certain feeling, but it's also kind of disturbing.
You don't want to live there, and in a way, that's increasingly our general condition,
but it's the cover, the cover art that they chose, which is why I asked you to, it's great
you're showing it, is deeply 70s.
I can go to my bookshelves and pull out a dozen paperback titles with pictures just
like that, including Carlos Castaneda books, so kind of the epitome of psychedelic shamanic
weirdness in the 1970s.
They have covers that are just this kind of style, and so for me, that cover was a strong
confirmation that this sense of the 70s and the sense of weirdness was very applicable
and resonant with our contemporary moment in a very literal kind of way.
Now the connection just that came to my mind, I'm doing a Monday to Thursday livestream
called Beyond Good and Evil, and the main theme of that is how we have moved from centralized
structures of authorities, or we're moving from them, towards a decentralized kind of
a world that has been possible by internet and smart devices, and the similar thing between
what you were saying about the 70s, and right now it seems to me to be to breaking the monopoly
on distribution of information and interpretation of information.
It's really interesting because America had gone through the first psychedelic revolution
in the late 60s, right, and the 70s was kind of getting stuff back together to create some
kind of an order, and exactly because of that kind of an uncertainty, a lot of awesome things
happened and a lot of horrible things happened.
Yeah, no, I think you're really right on there.
I would characterize what happened in the 70s a little bit differently, and I talk about
that specifically in the first chapter of the book where I kind of lay out the 70s,
and one of the main things that happens is precisely what you're talking about, which
is a shift towards pluralism.
It's not the 1960s, it's in the early 70s, when not just avant-garde groups of counter
cultural people, but the society as a whole step towards a multi-centered, multicultural
world.
I mean, in our views today, maybe not multicultural enough, but for that time, quite radically,
where institutions started to acknowledge different identity positions, different sexual
orientations, different genders, the black power movement had opened up a space where
now Native Americans started grabbing a slice of the pie, Chicano started grabbing a slice
of the pie, so suddenly we're in a world where there's more different kinds of ways to be,
and I use a phrase, I call it the centrifugal self, and it's the idea that the self used
to kind of orbit around a central source of authority, and that that authority broke down
at least for everybody who wasn't in the silent majority or the conservative or the Bible
belt side of America in the 1970s, so that authority breaks down and then suddenly, whoa,
you're in this immense centrifuge moving in different directions, drifting, sampling,
trying things out for size, and the place you really see that, at least that I know
really well, in addition to the kind of multicultural society, is that inside the kind of culture
of seeking, spiritual seeking, religious, what's going to replace religion, what are
we going to do next, hedonism, we've been partying for years, and it doesn't get us
far, you know, we're stuck, we need something else, what are we going to turn to, and you
find this enormous explosion of spiritual paths, gurus, sects, practices, you know,
as psychological seminars, as Rajneesh, meditation, blah, blah, blah, so suddenly, like all the
countercultural people, the ones who are seeking, it's this smorgasbord, you know, it's a multiplicity,
and you're right, at the same time, there are new forms of control that are entering
into the picture, you know, it's when we first start really using computer databases to track
consumers, it's when we, when the society shifts to a consumer debt economy, remember,
you know, Nixon takes us off the gold standard, so in a way, the economy is like set loose,
it's like, oh God, where's this thing going? Well, we can use computers to kind of not
only track people, but also help produce a sort of consumer debt culture where people
are kind of buying their way through different lifestyle options, oh, you want to be kind
of a swinger type, here we go, oh, you're into astrology, here you go, oh, you're a
Chicano, hey, we got stuff for you too, you know, so it becomes, in a way, it lays the
groundwork of our contemporary society, like if I look back, it's like, obviously, our
contemporary society is, you know, the origins of it are layered throughout, you know, millennia,
but the technological organization of culture and consciousness that we're sort of, you
know, kind of driving us crazy today, to my mind, you really go back to the early 1970s,
the emergence of the internet, the growth of satellites, the growth of these consumer
technologies of early kind of surveillance devices, I mean, of course, we've had surveillance
farther back, but they get technologized in a certain way that really kind of lays the
groundwork, and even as all of the energies of the counterculture kind of go into this
emerging world, you know, it's not like the counterculture is completely outside, maybe
that was true in 1965 or something, but, you know, it becomes part of Madison Avenue, it
becomes part of culture, culture and consciousness sort of loop around, so that today, you know,
you have something as crazy as like the titans of the most successful global corporations
on the planet are going out to Burning Man and gobbling weird drugs and celebrating this
Dionysian Bacchanalia that looks like the acid tests in digital overdrive.
So that is such a weird paradox if you think about the 1960s when computers were owned
by IBM and straight-laced guys in suits and the hippies are over here playing with, you
know, analog synthesizers and there's no connection between those worlds, there are very little,
and now they're like, you know, and we're like, geez, how do I define myself now?
So again, I think one of the appeal of studying the 70s is that there's a distance so we can
get some sense of distance, some sense of the overall map, and yet in that mirror, we
see ourselves and both the excitement and the creativity of that decentralized experience
you're describing and it's the fearsome sides of it, the scary sides of it, I mean, beyond
good and evil is an exultant place to be and it's a terrifying place to be, especially
when you think about it as a general condition that everybody else gets to discover as well.
Yeah, absolutely, because as you said, it's all about identity and how we are defining
ourselves and how interesting it is to compare removing of centralized orders with what happened
with economy when Nixon got rid of gold standard.
It's like the same thing has happened all around the world.
I'm originally from Iran and Iran is on fire right now and nobody knows what's going to
happen.
Nobody knows that they don't like the government, but nobody knows where they're going, nobody
knows what's going to be the case, but it is the very same thing happening in the United
States that we used to look from Iran to and like, oh, that's a stable place.
We want to go there and enjoy all the freedom and everything, but everything changed because
of the differences of identities and how people are, at least the way that I see it and the
way that people are able to express themselves without going through middlemen.
And I think it is exactly because of that that this is such an interesting time that
it seems like we were experiencing the second psychedelic revolution.
And I want to talk to you a little about the connection between religions and psychedelics
overall and whether or not we are going to witness the kind of coming and creation of
new religions and spiritual path and spiritual practices this time according to the kind
of society that we are experiencing.
John Allegro, for example, he had a book called The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross talking
about the study of nature and origins of Christianity within the fertility cults of the ancient
Near East.
Zeratostrians, they were munching on something called hauma that is coming from soma, that
it's a Vedic kind of a drink that apparently is responsible for creation of Hinduism.
How do you see this relationship and how do you see the creation of new ways to define
ourselves on a basis of religion and spirituality considering this new revival of psychedelic
experimentation and adventurism?
Yeah, that's a great question.
I think I won't talk about the relationship between psychedelics and the origins of religion.
That's a very speculative and controversial topic because there's a lot of sort of suggestions
about things that could be and in some cases we know that there was something like the
soma or hauma or the drink that fueled the Eleusinian mysteries, but what was in it is
a controversial topic.
So let's just say that even beyond psychedelics, the origins of religion lie in altered states,
in trance states, in dreams, in psychedelics, in group ecstasies.
And then over time they develop in all these various different ways, but there's always
traces of those experiences in even conservative religions.
So let's say conservative Christianity, like fundamentalists, anti-drug, maybe get a little
bit of wine, but they're not, they're distrustful of that.
But still, even for those guys, you read the Bible and in the first part of the Book of
Acts, which is what happens after Christ gets out of the grave and takes the elevator up
to heaven.
So they're sitting around and they go, what are we going to do?
And then you have the Pentecost happen.
What happened?
Pentecost?
You read that and it's like, my God, that's like an acid test.
Suddenly they're all together and then everyone's babbling and speaking all the languages and
the fire comes down on their head and they're all like, I mean, Pentecost, there's a reason
that Pentecostals, which we were named for Pentecost, there's a reason that Pentecostals
all around the world are by far and away the most ecstatic of Christians.
They're the ones who are going in there, they're getting totally altered states.
I mean, the theology is incredibly conservative and probably some of them want to kill drug
users and kill queers and I mean, you know, the theology is very conservative, but the
practice is actually pretty wild and you know, you find different mixtures in different religions.
So there's always this problem of like, what do we do with trans states and what do they
have to do with religion in a way they feed religion, they allow religion to get going
and then once religion's going, it kind of needs, it sort of needs them to keep going,
but then it also has to control them because they're freaky, they'll undermine your perspective,
they'll turn you into a mystic.
It's like, I don't need a priest, I talk to God, fuck you, I'm sorry, whatever, I'm
going to go off and do my own thing now.
So religions are always in this tension with altered states and how do you control them,
how do you give, how do you provide them, how do you resist them?
So what's going to happen now?
Very interesting.
I think that the, I mean, it's hard to say exactly what's going to go on with the psychedelic
Renaissance.
It seems pretty clear there's going to be relatively widespread access to psychedelic
medicine one way or another, particularly psilocybin, probably less so LSD.
At the same time, I think Ayahuasca is going to be more and more, even more and more accepted
and recognized as a valid path.
I mean, it's already the case that, you know, investment bankers from Wall Street or the
city in London are going to retreats and saying, oh yeah, Ayahuasca is another sort of golf
club in my bag for how to navigate the world.
So it's already reached a point of mainstream kind of awareness and I think that's just
going to increase.
So we are in this liberalization period of psychedelics.
How is that going to manifest in terms of religion or spirituality, which aren't quite
the same thing?
Let's say religions are more organized, larger, more traditional, more with more connections
to the past.
Spirituality can be all any number of things, although it also has its own, its own history.
Obviously spirituality is a big part of it.
Obviously people, you know, like if you look at, you know, around the world, people who
are interested in meditation, who are interested in yoga, who are interested in these indigenous
traditions, even if they're not indigenous, those people are often very interested in
psychedelics and indeed psychedelics helps fuel their speculations, their experiences.
You know, if you were into the tarot or astrology and then you take psychedelics and you kind
of trip out on astrology, it's going to get more, more astrological, not less, you know,
it's going to get more powerful, more enchanted, more poetic.
So it's a generalized fuel for spirituality.
But I think, but you asked about religion and I think that's the most interesting and
open-ended question.
What are we going to see in terms of liberal forms of Christianity, let's say?
Who knows?
I don't know, you know, there are little bits where you can see already things kind of gurgling
along the sides.
You know, there, I know that there is, there was one, you know, he sounded like a pretty
liberal Sufi guy, but there was one fatwa about ayahuasca that I can't remember the
sheikh's name right now, but he, you know, he laid it out there.
So there's, there's some world out there of like traditionalist Sufism that involves
ayahuasca.
So you're going to find these little zones, there's definitely Zen retreats that have
already been done and even studied where they take mushrooms as part of the Zen retreat.
And then they've studied whether the mushroom, whether the psilocybin actually aids some
of these other features of meditation and they seem to, they seem to allow people to
calm down quickly or get into deeper states, things like that.
So it's, it's pretty clear that, you know, and then ayahuasca depending on the situation
is more or less religion.
There are explicitly religious forms of ayahuasca like the Santo Daime and that's one of the
popular forms of it that people encounter in the West.
So I mean, it's hilarious.
You have like, you know, like out here where I live in the, in the Bay area, you have people
who like look and come from like totally just like hippie surfer, whatever, you know, totally
not religious at all.
Like what, and then they're, what are they doing?
They're putting on black pants and white shirts and black shoes and they're going and they're
dancing like this and they're singing songs about Mary and Jesus and stars and the jungle
to, you know, as they, when they go to Santo Daime groups, I mean, that's religion.
I mean, specifically like Santo Daime, you're all singing the same songs, they're religious
songs.
You're, you're, it's all about building community.
And I think that is the most interesting, whether we call it religion or not, how are
psychedelics going to help us really form new and vital forms of community?
Because the problem with the decent, one of the problems with the decentralized world
that you described, the beyond good and evil world is that when it happens in the context
of late capitalist consumerism with this incredible emphasis on the individual and on self-actualization,
self-improvement, self-realization, I need these things for me, for me.
It's about me, me, me, me, me, me, me, me.
And we can trace that back to the 1970s as well.
So when you have beyond good and evil and a culture of individualism, you get this problem
of isolation.
You get this problem of disconnection and that makes things worse.
That makes people more paranoid, makes them more angry, it makes it more volatile.
You know, it's a, it's a bummer, you know, and religion, you know, now we can look back
and go, well, religion, you know, it's not so great sometimes, but yeah, there's some
good things about religion and it's true.
There's some really good things about religion, the way it draws people together, it creates
a common sense of purpose.
If it's, if it's an ethical religion, it, even though there's some, you know, the ethics
are usually mixed, you know, don't, don't talk about the queers, but, but nonetheless,
there is a sort of ethical injunction that has a kind of progressive quality to it, even
if it manifests in, in mixed ways.
So I think our, part of our problem now is that it's pretty clear that individualism
is not going to, is not going to help us get through whatever we got to go through.
And when you see it in terms of psychedelics, if you notice, what is the mainstream view
of psychedelics?
What is the most widespread commercialized view of how people take psychedelics?
They go in as individuals into an office that is run by another set of individuals.
Maybe there's two people who sit with them and then as individuals, they go and lie down
on their bed, they put on their eyeshades, they take, they have their trip and maybe
their trip is ecstatic and maybe it's difficult, whatever.
And then that's the way you do psychedelics.
That's the mainstream view.
Does this remind you of anything?
It's totally individualized.
It's totally self-realization, self-healing, blah, blah, blah.
And I, I have no doubt that, I mean, this stuff is great.
That can be very useful for people, very helpful.
I'm not saying that that shouldn't happen, but the fact that that's our main imagination
for it, it tells us that we don't know how to do this kind of work collectively.
And so on the other side of the fence, then you have something like Burning Man, where
you had all these 10, 70,000 people go out there and a lot of them are on drugs and it's
this crazy exploratory, spontaneous, creative, inventive, ecstatic, Dionysian kind of thing,
which is awesome.
And it does help build community in certain ways.
The community of the campmates, you know, all the difficulty of doing that.
And so in a way, I think that the, the fact that on the one hand, we have the guy alone
taking the drug with the blind shades and the other extreme is Burning Man, which is
a kind of gesture towards a politics of community.
It's just, it's not, you know, it's, it's good in some ways and not so good in other
ways.
I think there are other things in between, maybe smaller scale, but ones where people
are much more woven into a kind of collective sense of being in the world.
And the one that interests me the most, which you can say, I don't know, religion is the
right word, is what I would call the kind of new animism.
And this is the sense that's rooted, you know, in profound spiritual experience and many
sacred texts and many poet poetic texts and in our, frankly, in our own childhood experience,
the sense that the world is alive, that the world, the objects in the world are alive.
And you could be a rationalist and go, well, they're not really alive.
And I'm like, okay, sure, fine.
But on some level they are because we're interacting with them.
They have their own things to say, you know, any, all the things in my office have histories
and stories.
They, certain conditions produce them just as certain conditions produce me.
And when I encounter them, it's an encounter.
It's not just me using them.
That's the rationalist view is we just as humans, we just use the world, but the world
is also, it's a world as part of a, it has its own world.
The things in the world have their own world and we're encountering them and psychedelics
really sort of inflame that kind of sense of relationality, that sense of, of the aliveness
of things and that there's a politics in that as well.
There's a way of recognizing how embedded we are in all these different systems that
are non-human and having to kind of recognize the, the alienness and the majesty and the
confusion of our situation beyond the human, you know, so you just talk about beyond good
and evil.
Well, let's talk about beyond the human.
What does it mean to really be alive and awake in a world where you recognize that you as
a human are always completely embedded in all of these non-human systems, technological
systems, media systems, control systems, but also air and wind and water and food and nutrients
and toxins and cosmic rays.
That's a very psychedelic vision, but it's also a very political vision and a very embedded
ecological vision.
And so I'm really interested to see forms of religiosity and spirituality that are involved
psychedelics that kind of move in that direction.
And then I have one more thing to say, which is that we are definitely going to see some
flipped out kooky cults coming down.
There's no way there's not going to be like, cause it's so easy.
You know, you're, if you're a psychologically unsophisticated person, meaning unref, self-reflective,
even if you're sophisticated about other people, but you're not reflective of yourself, it's
totally easy to believe your own BS and think that you've achieved some kind of realization.
You present yourself as a realized psychedelic being, all the people who are insecure are
like, oh, he knows, or she knows, let's surround him.
And then you take it and then you program people unintentionally, even you say like,
oh, we're all part of, can you see the cube, the cube that's formed between us?
And you're like, yes, I see the cube because psychedelics are so responsive to set and
setting to, to programming, essentially you, they're very sensitive to that kind of stuff.
So used consciously or unconsciously, it's very easy for people to get inflated and create
these kind of cult-like situations.
And we're totally going to see that stuff.
There's no way we're going to avoid that.
You know, I just hope it doesn't get so bad that it derails the good stuff that's, that's
coming down the pike, but it's going to get very interesting pretty fast.
Now, what you're saying resonates so much with me on, I just want to mention two points
of it.
Two weeks ago, I celebrated the 10th year anniversary of the first time I ingested psilocybin
mushroom in Vancouver, BC.
And it changed my life completely.
I went from being a complete militant atheist as a result of living for 23 years in Iran
to becoming, I don't know, and really embrace this not knowing and just curiosity to experience
rather than trying to understand.
And for years, I kept hearing about ayahuasca and we were talking about how it's a good
idea to go to Peru and do it.
And I ended up doing it for the first time in Florida, which is where I live now.
It's all over the place.
And what you were saying, the sense of community of it, that people sit overnight, at least
the way that I experience it, sit overnight around a fire.
The fire has its own philosophy, the smoke has its own philosophy.
It can get really religious, but at the same time, it is the sense of community that has
its negative, but it also has its positive.
And the other thing is, one of the most interesting topics to me is how we are going to merge
with our technology in a way that it's happening right now more and more, and how we are defining
what it means to be human.
So one of the questions that I keep asking from AI people and technologists that I invite
on this show is, would you say ethics and morality is objective or subjective?
If it's subjective, then how do we expect to create this new intelligence in a form
of artificial intelligence, if we haven't even figured out what our own values are as
a civilization?
Yeah, that's a really good question.
I'm with those that fear that particularly artificial intelligence in conjunction with
certain kinds of surveillance technologies, in conjunction with certain kinds of, let's
say, ultimately propagandistic meme control or whatever you want to call it, that that
is such a recipe for tyranny.
It's terrifying in its implications if you put your dark science fiction imagination
and you throw it in that direction, because there's certainly not anything inherently
ethical about increasing the capacity to control and to understand and to pattern and to connect
and predict, and all of the drivers of so much of contemporary society, they're not
really about ethical principles.
Do I think that a fully agential artificial intelligence would or would not have ethics?
That's a very interesting question.
I've spent a lot of time around Buddhism, and there are forms of Buddhism that really
try to use logic to undermine a lot of the conventional ideas that keep us locked into
certain egoic positions.
I sometimes fantasize, and I'm not the only one, about somehow programming an artificial
intelligence with the right logical principles that would inevitably lead to this kind of
bodhisattva compassion.
It's a fun science fiction story, but I think it does suggest that we do sense that there's
not going to be anything like inherent ethics that are coming out of these things just naturally.
It's like they have to be part woven into whatever it is that we're doing as we seek
out ethical answers, but ethics isn't looking so great out there on the global scale right
now.
It's like, oops, and it's so hard because for me, it's funny because you're from Iran.
In my own life, I've hung out with a couple dozen people from Iran.
I always have a great time.
I would love to go to Iran.
I know that I would show up, and I would have a great time, but it's also like this place
of fantasy because it's probably not going to happen, at least anytime soon.
But there's this great example of this incredible richness of culture and sophistication and
open-endedness.
I don't know if secular isn't quite the right word, but let's say the free-thinking culture
in Tehran throughout the 20th century was remarkable, even in comparison to all these
places around it, and yet from an American mainstream perspective, what's next to China?
It's like this sort of the most corroded, horrible part of it's like, oh, it's so awful.
There's so many wonderful people that are locked into this situation that we can't see.
Because we can't see them, we can just project a story about crazy Iranians or whatever.
To me, even geopolitically, I'm pro-Iranian, anti-Iranian, maybe whatever, that's another
discussion.
But I always felt that we should have tried to have been better friends with Iran for
a lot of reasons.
But that stuff aside, for me, it's always an example of if only we could communicate
more on a level of people and that there was some kind of shared sense of value that would
enable us to get over the inevitable differences and recognize that it's we that are being
oppressed by them on top, and instead of just projecting both ways, it's hard to describe.
No, I totally get it.
The problem with Iran, unfortunately, is that I always consider Iran to be an occupied country
by the Islamic regime because they're an absolute minority, absolute majority of people have
nothing to do with them, they're very westernized.
When I came to Canada, I had no culture shock.
My biggest culture shock, I keep telling people, it was how Western liberals criticized me
when I criticized political Islam that we all suffered under, the theocracy.
But it's just an unfortunate kind of a situation.
Eric's new book is called High Weirdness, Drugs, Esoterica, and Visionary Experience
in the 70s.
Eric, what kind of lessons have you learned or we haven't learned from the 70s that we
can use in this path that we're in at this time?
That's a really good question.
I mean, I think that in a way, some of the most inspiring stories of the 70s, which aren't
necessarily not exactly the ones that I'm talking about, because I'm really talking
about individuals who are like plunging into the depths of the mind.
But the part that I find most inspiring about the 70s is its sense of creative bricolage,
and I'll explain that term.
So it's a term from anthropology.
And what it means is sort of using what's at hand to cobble together something new.
So it's not like you can make something out of nothing.
It's not like you can engineer the perfect form.
You take a bit of this and a bit of that and a bit of this, and then collectively, you
kind of build something.
And this was a way like a lot of communes happened in the early 1970s.
You know, most of them didn't last that long.
But for the period of time that they were living, they were fascinating experiments
and they brought people together in new ways, with new ideas.
And they were like the same thing, like, let's take a little this, take a little that, put
it together.
And in a way, the three thinkers that I look at in the book, they're all bricolors of the
imagination or philosophical bricolors.
I call them garage philosophers, because they're like hacking it out in their garage.
They're tinkering away.
It's not like they're elites.
So there's something about that quality of tinkering, of hacking, of throwing together
this and that, of assembling that is a really strong thread in the 70s that feels appropriate
today in some way, although our tools are so different and how we think about the media
is so different.
But when I look ahead and I really, I can't believe that it's predominantly in the inside
the internet sphere, the communication sphere, the social media sphere, that we're really
going to find our way back to something or not even back, just find our way towards something
that gives us a better handle on things.
I just feel like it has to be in the real world, even as the real world is more difficult,
it's more crowded, it's uglier, it's more surveyed.
All of these not so groovy, more poisoned, more dying, but it's something about being
in the physical world with others in shared projects that seems to me a hopeful way to
go.
Excellent.
I can talk to you for hours, I know your time is precious.
So what's next for you and how our audience can follow your work?
Sure.
The way to follow me is I've had the same website since the mid 1990s.
It's called technosis.com, T-E-C-H-G-N-O-S-I-S.
It's the name of my first book and it's still in print.
So it's one people still like to turn to.
And so that's a great place to follow me.
You can sign up for my mailing list.
I only send one out like once a month.
And as for my next steps, I have a few writing projects that, you know, I'm not talking
about right now, but they're modest and I'm not really sure actually.
There's a number of different things that I'm thinking about.
I did a podcast for almost a decade and I needed a break.
So earlier this summer I went on hiatus and it continues to be a hiatus.
I know I'll return to podcasting in some form or another because I like it so much.
But it's actually a kind of a good time for me to sort of see what's going to come up
and not just dive right back in.
I think in our culture today, especially there's this kind of tension of like, you know, you
always got to be on it.
You got to be like producing, producing, producing, producing.
And if you don't stop and let it kind of break apart or like just kind of throw up a wall
temporarily, you're just going to follow like the kind of immediate path that you're laid
out for.
And that might take you somewhere interesting.
But if you can afford it, you know, temporarily, mentally, whatever, you can just go, okay,
wait a second.
What's okay.
I could go there.
I could go there.
Like what's happening?
What comes out of the bush?
What's what attracts you?
So I'm kind of doing doing that at this moment.
But there's definitely going to be podcasting, events, lectures, writings.
And you know, so so again, the technosis.com and getting on the mailing list is the best
way.
Fantastic.
Before I ask you the last question that I ask all my guests, is there anything else
you would like to add that we haven't got a chance to talk about?
No, that's good.
I'm also on Twitter.
I do Eric Davis to Twitter.
That's a fun one.
I like I like Twitter.
I don't I avoid arguing arguing on Twitter, I've got one or two trolls and I've disarmed
them both times.
I shouldn't say that because that's like a that's like a, you know, I'm not going to
let him disarm me, you know, whatever.
But I you know, I kind of I try to like maneuver through that whole thing.
And so for me, it's a much more friendly and exciting place.
So let me ask you the last question I ask all my guests that if you come across an intelligent
alien from a different civilization, what would you say as the worst thing humanity
has done?
And what would you say is our greatest achievement?
So not the way we are, but what we've done.
Yeah.
That's interesting.
That's the difference between us.
Funny that that popped in is like how that how you know, what's the worst thing about
human beings the way they are versus what they've done and the best thing?
That's a push we well, I think I think the the the despoiling of the thoughtless despoiling
of our planetary environmental situation is the worst thing from a kind of cosmic perspective.
Like we've done more horrible things to other people.
I mean, you could say, you know, all the ways we've treated ourselves basically could be
just as just as bad.
But there's something more, even more thoughtless and insane about that, about the environment.
And then the best thing are, you know, art, art.
I mean, for sure.
I mean, what I sometimes think that, you know, if an intelligent alien came to our, you know,
our zone and was like, oh, what's what's of what's the value here?
They would mostly be disgusted, but they go, but you know, there's some good stuff there.
You know, we got a got Taj Mahal, you got, you know, J.S. Bach, you got Thomas Pynchon,
you know, there's some good stuff out there.
So I kind of almost feel like the human experiment, if it's going to be if it's going to be justified,
can only really be justified in in art in the full sense, like art as in a way of living
life, not just of creating objects and being the same, you know, grubby, competitive narcissist
that everybody else is, you know, it's not just the objects, but the art as a pathway.
But I still feel like both of these answers were a little not quite as as it's a tough
one.
But I still feel like both of these answers were a little not quite as as it's a tough
one.
