If my mind is in part a function of what's going on in the external world already, and
if all these amazing things are happening in the internet and artificial intelligence
and big data, and all of those can be construed as part of my mind.
But furthermore, there are these methods of communication in which I can communicate and
exchange ideas with people like you, right?
I am like very rapidly achieving like higher and higher, I don't know, planes of consciousness
is the right word, but certainly I'm learning a lot more and thinking in ways that I couldn't
imagine thinking earlier, right?
So to me that there are these avenues of sort of naturally growing that are much more interesting
to me than to try and find some sort of imaginary wall to our intelligence or some sort of ceiling
to our intelligence is a better way to put it, which if we could break through that then
we can see the world correctly.
Peter Ladlow, welcome to the 85th episode of New Human Podcast.
Thank you.
I've been looking forward to this.
Yeah, absolutely.
Likewise.
And from Mexico.
I am in Mexico, yes.
How are you doing with the pandemic in that part of the world?
You know, they seem to have a better handle on it than we do in the United States.
I mean, like things are really tight here, lots of precautions, people are following
the rules.
So I actually feel safer here than in the United States.
Interesting.
I want to talk a little about, well, before that, let's get to the work you've done,
the lives you've lived and what do you mainly focus on nowadays?
I ask everybody just to establish some kind of a perspective and the context so our audience
know where your thoughts are coming from.
Well, okay, let's start here.
Let's start with graduate school.
So in 1979, I moved to New York to go to grad school in philosophy at Columbia University.
And my thought was I was going to do philosophy of language and I showed up and people were
doing strange things like the philosophers were doing linguistics, by linguistics I mean
linguistics in the sense of Chomsky's program and generative linguistics.
And the linguists in the sort of vicinity were doing philosophy and I thought that was
sort of weird.
And I was a bit distracted from the program and I spent a lot of time downtown because
a very distracting time to be in New York in 1979 when I arrived.
And there was a lot going on and had been going on since like 1977 when punk came and
really the birth of rap was in that period.
But there was a movement that was known then or at least it's known now as No Wave, as
in N-O, No Wave.
And what was going on is that way down in the Lower East Side in Alphabet City, which
at the time was completely bombed out, there were these kids I guess.
And there were a bunch of musicians that decided they wanted to become filmmakers and there
were a bunch of filmmakers that decided they wanted to become musicians.
And so everyone was just doing things they didn't know how to do and the result was fantastic.
So the best example of this is that there was a band that I really liked called Del
Byzantines, Byzantines spelled T-E-N-Z.
And I used to go and watch them a lot and the lead singer slash keyboardist was a guy
by the name of Jim Jarmusch, who we now know as a very famous film director.
I remember when his first movie came out, it was just a little low budget thing called
Permanent Vacation.
This was before his big breakout movie, which was Stranger Than Paradise, I guess.
And it just blew my mind.
I go, wow, that's like Jim Jarmusch, like my hero from Del Byzantines.
And then it was sort of that where I got it that there were these people, everyone was
doing, we have these musicians trying to make movies and filmmakers trying to start bands
and it's not like they were working in a vacuum, they were still surrounded by musicians and
filmmakers and all that stuff.
And so then I got it.
I just said, you know what, I really want to take a deeper dive into linguistics.
And so I applied to go to MIT as a visiting scholar in the linguistics program and I really
got into linguistics when I was there.
I mean, I asked them to put me in housing with linguists or in an office with linguistics
grad students.
And at one point, I went and talked to the chair of the linguistics department.
I said, I am really getting into linguistics.
I'm thinking about like maybe transferring or like after I get my philosophy PhD, maybe
I'll try and get a linguistics PhD.
And he looks at me and goes, well, you're getting a PhD anyway.
What do you care?
It doesn't matter what your PhD says.
If you want to learn linguistics, learn linguistics.
That's it.
And no one cares.
I mean, linguists don't care.
No one cares if your PhD is in philosophy or whatever.
You just do linguistics.
And that came as a kind of a revelation to me and it fueled subsequent work, which was
often work that was not in my official area of expertise.
So my first job out of grad school was in an artificial intelligence group at Honeywell.
What year was this?
So let's see, that would have been 1985, 86.
It was the intelligent interface systems group at Honeywell.
And those were the very early days.
It was really the second iteration of artificial intelligence.
And that was sort of interesting.
And then I was offered a job in philosophy.
Many things happened.
I was offered a job in philosophy.
I took it.
But I retained interest in other things.
And one of the very early things I was interested in was what was then becoming the internet.
I mean, it was very early stages.
And I edited a collection for MIT Press called High Noon on the Electronic Frontier.
And that covered a number of conceptual issues that were already coming into place.
One set of those issues had to do with cryptoanarchy, which I guess is something you want to talk
about a little bit.
And then a few years after that, right around 1999, I assembled the second collection, which
was titled Cryptoanarchy Cyber States and Pyro Utopias.
And while the first collection was very successful, the second one was not, or at least it was
not successful until now, like 20 years later.
Way ahead of its time.
Well, I don't know if it was that or what it was.
Yeah, I don't know what that was.
So it's very interesting that after all these years, that project is getting some uptake.
And I think a lot of it is fueled by what we see going on with cryptocurrencies and
decentralized finance and things like that.
And that's been it.
I mean, right now, I'm involved in two different projects.
One of them is kind of straight philosophical.
That's a project where I've been looking at some work that the medieval logicians were
doing.
And by medieval logicians, I mean people you've probably heard of, like William of Ockham.
He of the Razor and Abelard, he of the romance with Heloise.
And they had this really interesting project, which was, they wanted to take, well, first
of all, I mean, preface this by saying, you know, there's this myth about medieval logic,
which is that they weren't doing anything except singing peons to Aristotle or something.
And this is a myth that was perpetuated by people like Kant and Wittgenstein.
But it's a complete myth.
And what these guys were doing is they wanted to take Aristotle's logic, expand the scope
to cover basically any sort of language that you use, and then they were going to take
all of his rules of logic and reduce them down to two basic rules.
I mean, it's like an incredible project.
It's a mind blowing project.
And it ran aground some, I don't know, like 600 years ago because they didn't have the
tools to study language with the kind of fine logical detail that you need to.
But now here we are at the development of lots of work in logic in the 20th century,
and Chomsky showed how you could apply these tools to natural language.
So the idea is that now we have the tools to explore these questions after they've
been dormant for 600 years or so.
And then the other project is I remain very interested in cryptocurrencies, and in particular
a branch of cryptocurrency that's known as decentralized finance or DeFi, where you basically
do all the things that the banking industry and the insurance industry and all those things
that we consider to be part of serious real world finance, the question is whether you
can replicate all of those functions in the cryptocurrency space.
It seems like the beginning of Bitcoin, which now is how many years ago, like 12 years ago,
it kind of introduced some kind of a practicality to the philosophical perspective towards decentralization
and crypto anarchy.
And it kind of blew up because of that, and the context kind of evolved with it, right?
I think that's right.
And I think that goes some ways to explaining why the initial iteration of my book on crypto
anarchy didn't go anywhere, which was there was talk about digital cash in it.
And there were versions of digital cash available.
But they had not solved the big puzzle, which is called the double spending problem.
And it took Satoshi to do that.
And it required a technological breakthrough for it to really be feasible.
And we have that now.
Sorry, I just mute my microphone because of these dogs.
Sometimes it's just I don't even hear them.
Okay, good.
How has the definition of linguistics changed from the time that you've begun up to this
day?
It seems to me that language is becoming such a frontier, because different political sides,
different philosophical perspectives, they're fighting over how to define certain kind of
terms.
Let's say, for example, racism, racism means something to one side and means something
to other sides.
And they're fighting with each other that, for example, America is a racist country.
No, America is not a racist country.
But they're fighting with two complete different definitions of these terms.
Yeah.
No, that's exactly right.
Actually, I have a book on that that came out a couple years ago.
And it was called Living Words.
And it was, I had some subtitle for it, but now I'm forgetting what the subtitle of my
own book was.
It was called Living Words.
Wow, that's terrible.
You don't even remember the title of your own book.
I can tell you what it says.
So the basic idea is that you don't really learn a language.
It's not this thing that you sort of just take on full stop, but rather what we do is
we build little micro languages together.
So right now, you and I and your listeners are constructing a conversation together.
We're going to introduce terms.
We're going to get to understand each other better.
And the idea is that it's what I called in the book, and presumably this is part of the
subtitle, the dynamic lexicon is what I called it, meaning that word meanings are very malleable.
They're living words.
And so we have to think of them that way.
And then a lot of what we do in a conversation is not, I have something to say, I'm going
to say it, you're going to hear it, but rather we're engaged in this process in which we're
shaping the meanings of the words that we're going to deploy with each other.
So a lot of conversation that takes place is not here's some information, now you have
it, but rather it's sort of us fine tuning the words that we're going to use to carry
on further conversation.
It's almost like lexical grooming that we engage in.
And part of all of this is when we get into these cases where we have to argue about the
meaning of what's really racism and what's really sexism, what is a woman, for example,
does it include trans women?
All of these things are what I called in the book, lexical warfare.
And the idea is, well, what happens, you know, often we're in this position where we are
actually litigating what the meaning of a term is going to be.
And so there's no easy answers to how to do that.
But what I try to do is look for certain norms that govern the right way to do it and the
wrong way to do it.
And hopefully, hopefully we are going to get better or have a better understanding of how
to litigate these word meanings, especially when the cost is extremely high, because basically
every ethical issue we engage in is on some level, a kind of debate about what a word
is supposed to mean, you know, what is a person, you know, what is what is terrorism, what
is what is freedom, you know, all of these things, basically everything you when you
look at it, what you're doing is you're arguing about what the meaning of the word should
be.
Now, that doesn't mean any definition is equally good, because there are rules that sort of
dictate or norms that dictate whether we are adjusting the meanings of those words correctly.
I mean, Bill Clinton himself said that it depends on what is the definition of the word
is.
Yeah, I think he was, I think he was asking what they meant by the tense of that.
But yeah, yeah, I mean, it can sound kind of shady.
I mean, well, that's the thing, once you, you know, once you understand that you're
going to be negotiating the meanings of terms, then you have to then you have to be careful
because people can pull some really shady stuff with you.
And people do it all the time.
I mean, the government is the government for well, I don't mean to pick on a government
or the government, but they're always trying to shift the meaning of a term, you know.
So now, Antifa people are terrorists, you know, you know, it's always it's always going
on.
It's like an ongoing battle and you have to stay on your toes.
This fluidity of words and terms.
This is not a modern phenomenon.
This must have existed throughout history, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
We are where we are in this warfare that you're talking about, maybe because this process
of litigation has been democratized by the use of different kind of devices that now
people have their own voices that can be heard, that it didn't really matter maybe 100 years
ago that there were different definitions of racism, the definition that would turn
into a status quo was determined and established by a centralized structure of authority that
had control over newspapers or different kind of media and that was the term.
But now with these, you know, I always refer to these that we're like monkeys with machine
guns.
We don't really know the power of these things, but we are using them for our own biologically
driven intentions.
Yeah, I mean, I think I mean, it's hard to know exactly what the consequence of new media
is going to be for this.
For sure with the advent of television and so forth in the previous century, you might
have thought, oh, wow, this is really great because now we can discuss alternative meanings.
But what you got instead was more of a system of control.
That is one understanding or one meaning of the term became quasi-official.
I mean, it's not like we had some academy that was telling us what a word should mean,
but because of corporate control of media in the United States, there was a kind of
control of what words could mean in accepted media.
Now that raises the question, now that we're all monkeys with our little computers in our
hands, what is that going to mean?
Is it going to mean we get a kind of fractionalization of different word meanings?
And that could happen.
And what you could get is a bunch of people descending into different bubbles where, you
know, this cluster understands a word like freedom in this way.
This cluster understands a word like freedom in a very different way.
And now we're just talking past each other.
So the real trick, I mean, it's easy to have a unified meaning of what a term is.
And it's easy to have little clusters of different meanings.
The hard part is getting these clusters to find common ground with each other and negotiate
what the words ought to mean, right?
And that is the skill that I think perhaps we have lost somewhere along the way.
I mean, I don't know, I mean, any sort of historical story is going to be somewhat fantastical
here.
But I can imagine an earlier history and an earlier time when people got together in the
bazaar or whatever, and they're not just negotiating the price for spices or whatever, right?
Let's say we're on the Silk Road or something and we're negotiating prices, but we're also
negotiating word meanings.
And I tend to think that there wasn't necessarily set understandings of what a word is supposed
to mean, right?
But maybe with the 20th century, we began to have those kinds of set understandings.
And even now, when we ghettoize ourselves into different bubbles inside of Facebook,
I'm not sure that we are addressing important questions about not just what words mean to
us and our friends, but what they ought to mean.
Yeah, it was also a matter of documentation of them too, right?
The idea that history is written by the victor, that what we are reading is not necessarily
what had happened, is what has been written down and documented.
And the difference right now is that this process of documentation or litigation that
you're saying, it's been democratized.
So it's not that there is any kind of a singular kind of a foundation, because there are different
kind of needs, different kind of desires, different kind of...
People are different.
Equality, objectively, has no meaning, naturally speaking, at least to me.
Equity is a different kind of a story, but the fact that you want to start everything
at point zero, what are we going to do?
Are we going to eventually genetically engineer everybody to start at the same ground with
the same kind of...
It's just impossible.
Right.
Impossible.
We all start from different places, right?
And so given that we're starting from different places, how do we engage with each other and
create, in my terminology, micro-languages with each other so that we can communicate
even though we begin from different starting places?
And you mentioned a point earlier where when we look back historically, we often don't
really understand how variegated language was and all the different forms in which it could
be found, ranging from how things were written to the different understandings of word meanings.
And hopefully, if nothing else, what the internet is going to give us is a vast repository where
we're...
A hundred years from now or a thousand years from now, we're going to be able to study
the different ways in which people were using language in our time.
And this depository now is being used for development of artificial intelligence as
well, right?
And let's think about this context in the big picture of what Marshall McLuhan said,
that man becomes sex organs of the machines.
We're basically feeding the machines to become whatever that they're going to become.
And it seems like more and more aspects of our lives are becoming digitized.
So this is not a process they're going to reverse at any point.
It's just going to accelerate.
I mean, it's very interesting to think about what is the nature of the symbiotic relationship
we have with the internet, because it is taking on a big chunk of our cognitive function.
I mean, it's onloading lots of our memory.
And so you might ask a question, I mean, there's certain philosophers, like a guy named David
Chalmers has asked this question, where exactly is...
Extension.
Extended mind.
Exactly.
And so, well, where is my mind?
Well, where's my memory?
I mean, that's an easy, you know, because like you asked me a question, I don't remember
the...
Well, a great example is you asked me the title of my book and I can't remember the
subtitle.
Well, I can't remember it.
I just don't have my phone handy and I don't want to be rude and pick it up.
But that's it.
I just like offload a bunch of my memory onto my telephone or into the internet.
And so we begin to create this very weird symbiotic relationship with a machine, but
not just with our physical bodies, right?
But actually our minds are...
Much of our mental processing is being done externally.
You know, people always talk about, oh, I want to get a computer inserted in my head.
It's too late for all that.
In effect, that's already...
You don't have to put it in your head, right?
The fact that you're relying on the internet and on Google or DuckDuckGo or whatever search
engine you use, the fact that you're relying on that to reason and to carry on your cognitive
functions shows that that fusion of your mind with the internet is to some extent already
happened and you don't need to do sci-fi things like implant things into your head.
So you're not on board with Elon Musk's Neuralink?
No.
I mean, it would be interesting to see what happens.
I would expect something interesting to happen.
And from an engineering problem, it'll be really fascinating.
But from a philosophical issue, it's almost like, well, yeah, but it's kind of...
We've already done that in a way, in the most interesting way, at the most philosophical
level, it's already happened.
One of the arguments...
I've talked to a number of people about this.
One of the arguments is that in order to find who we are, which is the way to find about
the universe and everything else to look within inwardly, we require to develop higher levels
of cognition, cognition ability, because we're doing really good compared to monkeys, but
we could do way better.
Whatever the definition of that better is, that's debatable.
But the fact that what we're experiencing is not all there is.
We can experience far more, let's say like in matrix kind of an environment.
And to get there, we cannot rely on biology and trial and error driven process of evolution.
Now that's very arrogant.
Some people would say, well, you're playing God and you don't know how this going to affect
and influence your environment and you can mess everything up.
But at the same time, it has a spiritual kind of aspect to it too, that if I can know more
and be more, why wouldn't I do it?
I've never been on board with this kind of project.
Because I feel that you can change your cognitive makeup.
People think, well, all right, there must be a higher plane of reality that I can achieve.
I could know things better.
But it's always occurred to me that you might achieve a different way of thinking, but I
don't know that...
There's an interesting sense in which it's a higher plane.
It's a different plane, right?
And you might get there and you might look down at your previous life before you enhanced
your mind with implants and so forth and you say, wow, that was really stupid.
But that's not really evidence that you've achieved a higher plane, right?
It may be evidence that you've achieved a plane of higher hubris or something like that.
And the other element to it is I'm not convinced that we are even close to bumping up against
natural limits to our own intelligence.
Part of that is because I don't think our own intelligence is solely a function of what's
going on inside of our heads.
And this brings us back to the business about the extended mind.
That my mind is in part a function of what's going on in the external world already.
And if all these amazing things are happening in the internet and artificial intelligence
and big data, and all of those can be construed as part of my mind.
But furthermore, there are these methods of communication in which I can communicate and
exchange ideas with people like you, right?
I am very rapidly achieving higher and higher, I don't know, planes of consciousness is the
right word, but certainly I'm learning a lot more and thinking in ways that I couldn't
imagine thinking earlier, right?
So to me that there are these avenues of sort of naturally growing that are much more interesting
to me than to try and find some sort of imaginary wall to our intelligence or some sort of ceiling
to our intelligence is a better way to put it.
Which if we could break through that, then we can see the world correctly.
Yeah, I totally agree.
And it's very interesting, I mean, I would consider myself a transhumanist in a sense
that I believe that humanity and technology, we have evolved together in a sense the way
that Kubrick portrayed it in 2001 Space Odyssey.
We found a tool and then we used it in order to obtain things for ourselves and then protecting
those things against a different tribe and then a different tribe looked at us and they
improved that tool a little bit and now we have International Space Station and reusable
rockets and all that.
But you're absolutely, I think, spot on with saying that we haven't even tapped into the
full potential of our own cognition and ability and we cannot really make the claim otherwise
when we have a variety of psychedelics completely illegal and hey, you cannot do that, don't
you dare doing that and this is an interesting time we're talking about it because it's
the second revolution of psychedelics that are happening right now.
If really we're in the second revolution of, well, you know, it's funny you say that
because I'm living in Mexico now and so, I mean, there are a lot of people that are
experimenting with psychedelics but they have been for, you know, a thousand years, like
the huichol with the peyote and so forth or if you go down to Brazil, lots of tribes and
I mean, I actually have thoughts about psychedelics and their history with people which is that
to some extent the human mind evolved to not really function that well, it's on its own
like in isolation but we evolved to be able to function with the help of the things we
find around us and in some sense that might be magic mushrooms or whatever the case might
be.
You're talking about the stoned ape theory?
What's that?
I don't know that theory.
What?
The stoned ape?
That like almost every animal on the planet has a way of managing its mental health with
the help of some form of drug, you know, from reindeers with their little red cap mushrooms
to really, is there an actual theory with the name about stoned apes?
Yeah, Terrence McKenna, Terrence McKenna's theory, stoned ape theory is that we basically,
our brain evolved faster than the rest of our body because we started experimenting
with psychedelics.
I would say that we co-evolved with these substances, okay?
So I don't know.
I mean if you went back to early, early history, I believe we actually co-evolved with some
of these substances and we can find them around on planet Earth right now because early human
ancestors found them useful.
And so to function correctly, cognitively, we needed these plants.
We don't need them now.
You know, we have Big Pharma that can help us, I suppose.
But you know, if you try and, here again we get into this issue of the externalization
of the human mind, right?
It's not just what's in here and it's not just what we can connect with the internet.
But once you start passing laws that prohibit people from using these substances, like peyote
or whatever it might be, in a certain sense you're passing laws that are walling off parts
of people's very own minds, if that makes sense to you.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, I'm saying this is the second, I mean it's well established that we're going through
a second psychedelic revolution because of organizations like MAPS, which is a multi-discipline
multi-disciplinary association with psychedelic studies that they're pushing to legalize MDMA
for example, to deal with depression and PTSD for, because there are more, for example,
veterans are dying inside the United States than they're dying in the battlefield.
And a lot of them get hooked on like opioids and stuff, but then they do like two sessions
of ayahuasca and you know, it does magic for example for them.
Interesting.
Yeah.
Interesting.
It's a moral kind of argument.
Yeah, I mean I'm not any sort of expert on this and I'm not, I mean I have my own way
of managing my mental life, which involves a lot of time and the internet and with computers
and so forth and gaming, but it's very clear to me that there are people that really need
these substances and access to them and it's critical, it's a critical part of their mental
lives.
Yeah.
And it's, it's, it's alien to deny that to people.
Absolutely.
Like say, well, you can't use this part of your brain.
Yeah.
Or explore it.
Yeah.
Or explore it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And so, but coming back to your point, I mean, yeah.
So these are, I don't think of them as even tools.
I think they are these, these, these substances, these natural substances are parts, critical
parts of our mental lives.
And so obviously if you deny yourself those elements to your mental life, you're going
to set up certain limits to what you can and cannot think.
And you start, you start placing, you start placing limits on, on your mental life.
And that's when people start asking for things like, you know, I want to, I want implants
or something like that.
You don't need implants.
You just, you just need the things that are already there and that's going to open up
business that are so vast.
I mean, we can't even begin to, we can't even begin to quantify the vastness of the spaces
that are already available to us.
I think the bridge that connects what we were talking about to back to the digital world
and cyberspace, and I want to talk about crypto-anarchy, it really comes down to individual liberty
that you, you will be able to determine who you are and what you're going to do with that
information or data or whatever that determines you, that you represent in a cyberspace, for
example.
And I want to ask you about what is happening to the concept of individuality in the digital
realm or cyberspace or metaverse and whether or not crypto-anarchy from your perspective
is the soul, and I would argue that it should be decentralized crypto-anarchy, right, because
I know that anarchy philosophically means that it's decentralized, but it seems like
for humans you have to emphasize on key terms.
Decentralized crypto-anarchy is the only way and only avenue in order to protect this sense
of individuality, however it's going to be defined based on our evolution.
Let me say that I am a bit concerned about all the talk of individualism that we get
in the crypto sphere because it's onboarded a lot of libertarian talk and I'm sure that
many of your listeners are libertarians and I have issues with libertarianism and talk
of individualism and I would much rather frame all of this in terms of limits on what we
could think, right, using a plural pronoun there, like, you know, what we can do, what
we could think, and I don't – I think it's more helpful to think about what crypto-anarchy
opens up to us in terms of possibilities for collaboration that otherwise couldn't happen
because it has to be – in certain cases, it has to be hidden from maybe from the state,
but the state is not the only problem here.
It might have to be hidden from society as a whole because of certain negative attitudes
that society has to the ideas that you're exchanging, right?
So for me, if crypto-anarchy doesn't really open up a space for me to be me and I can
do whatever the hell I want and I can think whatever I want, but it's more like it's
opening up a space for us to engage in collective activities that we otherwise not have been
able to do and that's going to benefit me because it's not just me sitting here in
a vacuum but when I'm engaging with other people who now have this freedom as well,
the freedom to negotiate new meanings and terms freely together, right, then that opens
up another canvas for us to explore, right?
Another unlimited canvas or at least a very vast canvas that's going to open up to us
and allow us to explore.
So individualism, I'd rather use a term like freedom and that would include not just
individual freedom but collective freedom or community freedom, family freedom, you
know.
Freedom of association maybe would be a good term, umbrella term.
Freedom of association?
Not just freedom of association but I mean there's more to it than that because if we
have, I mean freedom to associate is key, right, and I mean the internet allows us to
associate from across distances and what Crypto Anarchy does is allows people to associate
with us that might not otherwise be able to, right, because their government might not
even think they should be online so they have to find other ways of getting online.
I mean they might have to use Tor or something to not be spied on when they're online talking
with us and then once and so that freedom as you say, freedom of association is going
to be critical but then once we get there we also have other freedoms.
We have these freedoms to exchange these ideas once we're associating and we have the freedom
to not just associate but to work together and to keep modifying or I like the word modulate,
to modulate word meanings with each other and that's key too.
That is that language should not be a prison to us but now language is going to be something
that we can, that's going to work for us instead of us working inside of a little cage that
language has provided for us and getting together with other people is the first step to that,
right, because if you're alone or you're with the same group of people all the time
then you don't have those options.
It's not going to be obvious how you should be expanding your language but once you have
the opportunity to sort of interact with people in other places, people from other cultures,
people with different ideas and different micro-languages, that's when things really
start to happen.
This relationship between language and us that you're saying that we're reverting in
a way that language will work for us rather than we work for the pre-established, there
are people who are benefiting from those pre-existed definitions of language.
They are, yes they are, yes.
Maybe government is one of the best examples of them, churches are another one, education
system.
People will make the case that patriarchy, people will say that you and I benefit because
of the sort of the patriarchal nature of language and so there's a kind of sexism built into
language itself and then there is this project which is what they would call, I think the
fancy word that philosophers use is conceptual ameliorization but what they mean is we want
to change the – people have imposed these word meanings on us and they're not helpful
and what we have to do is sort of break these definitions or bend the definitions because
we can't make any progress until we do that.
So yeah, basically in any sphere it's not just government, it could be cultural, it
could be religious, right?
What is a religious person, what is a moral person?
People use language to imprison other people and so a big part of freeing yourself and
freeing your family and freeing your friends is to resist this.
First of all, identify when people are using language to imprison you and secondly, finding
the tools that allow you to resist it and to make the case for your view of how language
actually should be shaped.
So what's going to happen to those benefactors of this language prison in the coming years
as information is becoming more and more democratized?
Yeah, well, they're going to freak out, obviously.
They're going to freak out and you could see this, I mean there's going to be a kind
of linguistic conservatism, I don't mean that like Republican versus Democrat because they
can both be conservative.
Just hold on to what is.
Yeah, yeah.
And they're going to be pounding on tables saying, look, I have a dictionary right here
and it says like, this is what a woman is, it can't be a trans person.
No, I'm not making a case that trans women are women, I'm just saying the minute people
open up a dictionary and says that's how you resolve it, those are the people that
are falling back on a conservative sort of definition.
And people are going to be saying, oh, this new definition is degeneracy.
You're destroying language.
This is another one you're going to hear.
You're destroying language.
Everything is going to fall apart because you're destroying language and you're not
destroying language.
You're destroying language, you keep it in a prison and you don't let it evolve, right?
I mean, you keep it in a prison, it's like putting a tiger in a cage and just locking
it up there and thinking that you are somehow preserving it by doing that.
Well, you're not.
You have to turn it loose.
Do you think this point of authority to determine the definition and meanings of language is
shifting from human governance and authority to artificial intelligence?
I had not thought about that.
Only artificial intelligence can inform these sorts of decisions.
What would happen if an AI started telling us that, you know, you're using the definition
of woman wrong or you're using the definition of freedom wrong?
I don't know.
The thing is that the way I perceive all of this is playing out is that there's certain
people are going to come up and try and establish authority to you or establish their linguistic
authority, okay?
And there's a question, well, does that linguistic authority work here?
So, you know, we get stranded on Gilligan's Island and the professor comes to us and says,
well, no, actually a tomato is not a vegetable, it's a fruit, right?
Well, okay, maybe he has some knowledge about science there.
The question is, is that kind of authority relevant to how we talk about fruits and vegetables?
Likewise, if an artificial intelligence came to us and said, well, I have all these reasons
for thinking that, you know, a woman can't be a trans woman or that, you know, freedom
had some sort of definition of freedom for us.
He says that you have to serve the machine, but to be truly free, you have to serve the
machine.
And we're like, well, you know, you're a very smart AI, but like, you know, we don't
necessarily have to take that on, right?
And so it's still, even if there are smarter people out there, you know, we don't merely
have the freedom to do this or we should have the freedom to do it, we also have the responsibility
to say, well, look, I don't really, I don't know if I should onboard your definition just
because you're smarter than me because I have my own reasons for defining words as I do.
So maybe, you know, I have my own reasons for saying a tomato is a vegetable.
And I don't really care what the artificial intelligence thinks about that.
So at the end, so I guess my point is at the end of the day, we are going to have to still
be responsible for deciding which authorities we're going to accept.
And you know, I wrote a paper on this, but I actually never got around to writing.
I gave a talk on this and it's one of my favorite things to think about, but I'm just inherently
lazy about writing it down for some reason, which is about the issue of when you defer
to authority, right?
So it's a paper about deference.
And so when you should defer to someone and when you shouldn't, but deference, not in
like, should I cut my hair or should I, you know, salute a flag or something, but deference
to somebody about word meaning, about what a word ought to mean.
And it's not an easy topic.
And so part of the idea I had is that no matter what the authority is, you have to issue a
series of challenges to that authority, always.
It doesn't matter even if it's like some cool kid in school, right, that's using a term
and you think you should defer to that person about the meaning of a cool, a meaning of
a term.
Like suppose the meaning of the term is cool, what's cool?
So there's some guy who looks like Arthur Frans Larell Fonsi from Happy Days.
And we start, we defer to him, why?
Is it because of his haircut?
Is it because of his leather jacket?
Well, even a character like Richie in Happy Days at certain points has got to challenge
Fonsi.
And so the idea is, well, when do you challenge these linguistic authorities?
How do you challenge those linguistic authorities?
And this is something that fascinates me because I have no idea how it's supposed to work or
even how about we go about it.
But it's a skill we have to acquire because it's critical.
Because we're being surrounded by all these linguistic authorities.
They don't always have our best interests in mind.
They don't even have their own best interests in mind.
And we have to know when they're like, you know, they're jumping the shark or something
and sort of using a word like cool and correctly.
We have to be able to, we need to defer to individuals at certain times, like doctors
on the meaning of certain medical terms, for example, but we also have to be in a position
where we can challenge them.
And that is an art.
And if I had rules for doing that, I would tell you what they are, but I'm not even sure
there are rules.
I think it's just some practice.
Yeah.
Exactly.
And with this information, we have more uncertainty we are dealing with.
And I want to go back to what you were saying about New York, that it was a very chaotic
kind of an era that people were doing whatever they wanted to do and cool stuff were happening.
It seems like we're going through the same kind of a period right now in a different
kind of a way that people have access to devices to express themselves and challenge each other.
And we don't, as you said, we don't really know what the rules are, but maybe there are
no rules and good stuff happen as a consequence along the way.
And we just have to learn to notice and realize those moments of harmony, enjoy them and just
move on.
Yeah, I agree with that, except I would say it is never the case that there are no rules.
Sometimes you think there are no rules, but that's when you have to be really careful
because that means you're not seeing the rules, right?
It's like the, you know, the fish in the bowl thinks there's nothing out there, thinks it's
completely free because it's just swimming around wherever it wants to go.
And then those moments when you think that you're completely free, that's when you need
to be most on guard.
Yeah.
That's awesome.
Yeah, absolutely.
What are your thoughts on simulation theory?
I know I don't understand what these guys are talking about.
And some of them are my best friends, honestly, because maybe they just are putting it in
a way that I don't understand because I wouldn't call it simulation theory, meaning do we live
in a simulation?
Is that the question?
Simulation hypothesis.
I better say no theory.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, because the thing is simulations typically don't have the relevant properties of the
thing they are simulating.
So for example, I can simulate hurricanes using a computer, but it's not like if I open
up the computer, there's going to be lots of wind and rain in there, right?
Likewise, I might be able to simulate some anything using artificial intelligence, but
it doesn't mean that anything like whatever consciousness would be happening in there.
I think a better way to make the same point would be, well, what if we are synthesizing
worlds?
So you're not merely simulating them, but you're synthesizing them somehow using, maybe
using computers, maybe you can synthesize a reality using computers or something like
that.
And at that point, my attitude is, well, it doesn't matter if it's synthetic or nonsynthetic
and maybe it's just synthetic worlds all the way down, who knows?
So I've never really been grabbed by that simulation theory stuff.
It's interesting to me because you've written about consciousness as well, right?
Very little.
I mean, I've read a lot about consciousness and some of my very best friends write a lot
about consciousness.
And when they give these arguments about zombies and so forth, I worry because I think I must
be a zombie because I don't know what the missing ingredient is supposed to be.
And I've always been suspicious of talks about, you know, philosophers have these fancy words
for that sort of ethereal extra secret ingredient X.
Sometimes they call it qualia, sometimes they call it sense data, it's sort of like, well,
when you see something green, there is this green mental patch that exists somehow in
your mind in addition to the green thing itself.
And I've always been a bit suspicious of that.
You know, the philosopher Gilbert Ryle talked about this and he says, well, you know, people
talk about seeing a mental image with the mind's eye, but, you know, people never talk
about smelling mental images of smells with the mind's nose, for example.
We imagine popcorn, right, the smell of popcorn or buttered popcorn or whatever, but we don't
fall into this thing like, oh, there must be this thing that the mind's nose is smelling
in my head or something like that.
And I think, I can't get past the feeling that when we start talking about these sense
data or qualia or conscious experience stuff, that we aren't inventing something that isn't
there.
I mean, I guess Dan Dennett has a view that's similar to this.
So I mean, this might be exactly his view.
So maybe I'm a Danettian about this.
Another interesting way to look at it, I have a guest, I really like having him, Chris Nebar,
who is a neuroscientist, but he's also a Taoist.
And his whole thing is that we have a right side mind, left side mind, and all this need
to categorize and make sense out of stuff is the product of the left side brain.
And the right side is more of a curious childlike kind of a brain that it doesn't matter what
it means.
It doesn't matter in what category fits, it's just that you're experiencing it.
So try to make sense out of something with half of our brain, it just means that we're
just making sense of maybe half of the thing that exists based on our own categorization
of it.
Yeah, that's right.
I think you need the interplay of the two things, right?
That is, you know, I'm immediately thinking of talking about concepts without percepts
are empty, percepts without concepts are blind.
So it's sort of like, and so you need that kind of organizational element, or you don't
have any experience at all.
But then once you get things organized, right, conceptually, perceptually, and so forth,
you have to you have to keep interrogating the conceptual apparatus you've built for
yourself.
And you have to keep tearing it down and challenging it with I forget which side left or right
is going to do that.
But I guess that's the left, the right side of the brain is going to do that.
But that doesn't matter.
So you have, you know, so you need the two, this kind of interplay between the two.
You can't let either side sort of get lazy on you.
Yeah, now, when I talked to Chris, the whole thing is that the West has been dominant by
the left side of the brain that, you know, we just make sense out of everything and be
convinced that this is it.
But obviously, we have huge amount of problems here.
It seems like Western cultures and societies have figured the surface really well.
But don't you dare look beneath that because we have no answer for it.
And you're going to go rogue if you if you'd be curious a little too much about them.
Yeah, no, people get very uncomfortable, right?
Because people and myself included, I mean, I like, I mean, I like it that much.
But I do take some security when things are neatly organized, I know.
And the concepts we're throwing around, we know what we mean.
And, you know, we know what freedom means.
We know what a woman is, we know what this and that is.
And when those concepts start breaking down, it's, it's an uncomfortable feeling.
And it is true that in the West, we do get we do like to lock down concepts, right?
You know, it's a very weird thing.
I mean, this is I think this is related.
But if it's not, you could say this is not related.
But I was at one point, I was reading literature from Japanese business schools.
I just just because I thought it was interesting.
And there were the people that were working for 7-Eleven in Japan.
And the question was, how do you categorize the things that you have in your store?
What you're going to order?
What I mean, you think about it, it would never occur to you that that is a puzzle or
a problem that needs to be solved, right?
But you know, if you think, say you're in 7-Eleven USA, you know, these are the things
that we're going to keep in our store, you're going to be left behind pretty quickly.
Because the fact that we like things need to be organized in this way today, there's
no guarantee that you know, the next generation of people coming along or this crop of immigrants
or whatever, or however people are changing, these people using Hiawaska are going to want
to categorize things in the same way.
So what the business, these business school guys were looking at 7-Eleven Japan and looking
at ways in which they maintain fluid categorization of the concepts of the things they were keeping
on inventory and the things they were selling and the things they were ordering.
And a lot of that involved not just having, you know, it involved having multiple people
with different categorizations and throwing those people together.
And so that when you have people with very different ideas, like I mean, I guess this
brings us back to the Lower East Side of New York in 1979, when you get people with different
ideas and different ways of categorizing the world, something new and interesting is going
to come out of that.
Yeah, Japan is such an, have you been?
Yeah, yeah, but not, I mean, not nearly enough to really be any sort of authority on it.
Yeah, I've been once and like three years ago and all my childhood, you know, in Iran,
I watched a lot of anime and Japan for me was like India for hippies.
I always wanted to go and it did not disappoint.
And I always use it as an example of how organically they are adapting to technology.
Like you go to a temple that's been built like thousand years ago and there's a robot
priest in the corner that you can go and talk to and everybody's like, yeah, that's how
it is.
Yeah, no, I mean, that's my experience too, is they have this way of blending technology
with culture that I don't necessarily see in the United States.
I see it in some places, but technology seems more alien to it in the United States for
some reason.
It's something different.
It's something alien to broader culture.
I mean, with exceptions like in California and techno pagans and things like that.
Yeah, absolutely.
How do you see this coming decade shaping our civilization?
Because what we're going through right now this year, it seems like a dent to our civilization
and the sense of certainty and big changes are coming.
Seems like it.
How do you see it?
I see it that like every 50 years we get a revolutionary period.
Now I hear your dog is like that.
The last round was in the late 60s and before that around 1917 and then you go back I suppose
1848.
Basically twice a century we get into these revolutionary periods and then people onboard
new ideas.
You get these conflicts.
I think they're healthy conflicts.
Well, I mean, I need to be careful.
I mean, they're not always healthy conflicts.
Sometimes they lead to like massive scale genocides.
I know exactly what you mean.
I totally agree with you.
Big picture-wise.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We're seeing a lot of changes and right now I'm spending a lot of time in the decentralized
finance little subculture of the cryptocurrency business.
These are the people that are basically building platforms that are going to eliminate banks.
They're going to eliminate insurance companies.
They are going to eliminate lending institutions.
They are going to eliminate the money transfer.
You want to mention the name of some of them is XRP one of them?
No.
XRP is-
Not really decentralized.
Yeah.
It's the evil one because they sold their soul and they're providing a platform for
transferring information between big banks.
So let's start with everyone knows Bitcoin and then the second one people might know
is Ethereum and the coin is called ETH.
What is interesting about Ethereum is that- let me start with Bitcoin.
If you think of Bitcoin as being this ledger that we all share, it's all over the world.
We can see who has what or what account number has what.
So it's this giant shared ledger and if you think about it, what it does is it gives us
a way of keeping track of money, doing the function that a bank does with that and also
allows us to transfer money.
So it eliminates one institution of human trust, so that's the key thing.
Absolutely.
Centralized trust, typically involving a big corporation or a big bank like Chase or JPMorgan
and Chase or whatever.
Now when Ethereum came along, this kid who was then 18 years old named Vitalik Buterin-
Who I met once in Toronto.
You met him?
I met him once.
I used to co-organize Toronto transhumanist meetups and I came across this man, Corey
something.
He passed away unfortunately.
He was one of the early investors in Ethereum and they had this place called Decentral on
Spadina and King and I just stopped by to see the place and he invited us to organize
it there and Vitalik was there and this was like a year before Ethereum was released and
really quickly just said hi, shook his hand and that was it.
Yeah.
No, I mean you should listen to his podcast if you could get him on.
He's amazing.
If you look at some of the podcasts he does, he's very kind of somewhat robotic in style
but everything he says is like-
I would love to have them.
Yeah, absolutely.
So I actually got in on there.
I had some Bitcoin.
I was Bitcoin mining at the time and then I read about this project and it said, well
like if you send us a Bitcoin, we'll give you 2000 ETH.
I said, all right, what the hell, because like a Bitcoin was not worth anything at the
time.
It was like $250.
I said, what the hell, I'll get sent $250, I get 2000 ETH.
Because the project sounded amazing because the idea is just as you can record this information
on a Bitcoin blockchain and it's there, the whole history of this ledger is there for
everyone to look at, set in stone, Vitalik pointed out that, well, I can encode any amount
of information.
I'm going to build a blockchain where you could encode enough information so that you
could encode in any computer program.
Tokenize everything basically.
Tokenize everything and not only that, but you could activate these things so we could
build a contract that would execute itself.
Smart contracts.
You wouldn't need, right.
So there you go.
You don't need an organization of trust in order to hold the money for us or even make
sure that the contract is executed.
It just automatically gets executed.
And given that the language is, as we say, Turing complete, any contract that you can
write that's computable can be put into the blockchain.
And people for the, I guess, Ethereum just had its fifth birthday a couple of weeks ago
and it's taken some time for it to find its feet.
But right now there is a segment of crypto called decentralized finance or DeFi in which
people are now taking these tools and they are really going to town with these tools
and really doing things like issuing loans.
People are now putting mortgages on the blockchain.
People are engaged in, well, obviously fancy things like futures and futures markets and
so forth.
Insurance.
So the thinking is that eventually people are going to wake up to the idea that we don't
need to pay some middleman to sit in a big fancy bank in a giant building on Fifth Avenue
to do all this stuff and to hold our money and to invest that money in a carbon bubble
or the military industrial complex or anything like that.
You and I and all of our friends and people like us can just submit small amounts of money
into these contracts and then we basically build our own hedge fund, for example.
And we have like computers that are doing arbitrage for us.
We don't need big fancy companies to do that.
And so just as you don't see at Tower Records anymore, you don't have to go to Tower Records
to buy music, it's very rare to see giant bookstores these days, you buy all that stuff
on Amazon, Lord willing, these corporations, giant banks, giant insurance companies, they're
all going to go the way of Tower Records as well.
I totally agree.
I had just briefly, I had John McAfee on.
I saw that interview, yeah, that was hilarious.
That was a trip.
I was amazed that you were able to get into a word edgewise though because he'll keep
rolling.
Oh yeah.
And in the beginning, he was like, just so you know, I keep drinking throughout the interview.
So his thing, his thesis was that Bitcoin is going to go down and will do any other
cryptocurrency that does not have anonymity into it.
So I think he has a new coin.
I'm not recommending it.
He said Monero.
Ghost also is something that I think he has developed himself or with a bunch of people
he's been backing, but Monero, because of anonymity part of it.
But I guess that goes back to libertarianism.
That's more important to him than it is to us.
But yeah, well, that'll be interesting.
That's entirely possible.
That's entirely possible, in which case, yeah, these coins that do a better job of mixing
up the transactions.
So for example, right now, it's very easy to decipher our transactions using Bitcoin
because here's an account.
It went from me to this account and people figure out it's mine, they figure out it's
yours, and pretty soon they can reconstruct a network.
But when you get to things like Monero, it's basically mixing the transactions up.
So you don't really know who it's coming from or who it's going to.
Excellent.
Well, Peter, this was awesome.
I was looking forward to this conversation and definitely didn't disappoint.
What is next for you and where can our audience follow your work?
You mentioned you were working on two projects.
Yeah, let's see.
You know, I have some basic website that just keeps track of the basic stuff.
And I've just created a new Twitter account.
And again, my extended mine is kind of offline here right now.
So let's just have people start there.
I think, you know, they know how to use the internet, they can find me.
Excellent.
Let me ask you, I actually look for you on Twitter because the final product you've seen
my podcast, I put the Twitter handle on the bottom, I couldn't find yours.
I think I found a post from a couple of years ago, but your account was deleted.
So I'm going to add that to the notes after the show.
Yeah, I think the Twitter account I'm using right now is brand new.
I have like 10 followers, so you guys can help me out with this.
Let me see.
I think it's...
Wait, I'm going to check right now.
But the name is EJ Spode, as in letter E, letter J, Spode, S-P-O-D-E.
And I'm just checking here right now to see if there is some underscore involved in that.
EJ underscores Spode.
Also, I have a couple of papers online under that pseudonym as well.
I have a book review of the Kingdom of Language by Tom Wolfe and a paper actually, it's on
Ethereum and this issue of trust and the limits of decentralized trust.
And a couple of other papers under that name, but I've just fired up this Twitter account,
EJ underscores Spode.
Yeah, tell your listeners or watchers to add it so I have...
It's really embarrassing because I only have like 10 followers at this point.
Well, and Rome wasn't built overnight, so...
Let me ask you the final question I ask all my guests, that if you come across an intelligent
alien from a different civilization, what would you say is the worst thing humanity
has done and what would you say is our greatest achievement?
See, I need to watch your podcast to the very end because then I would be prepared for this.
I'm glad you didn't because just getting caught off guard is one of the best moments of each
episode.
Yeah.
So, okay.
So, it's the best and worst of humanity.
That's what I have to explain to this alien.
Well, I think that the worst thing is that we imagine ourselves as being somehow above
the natural realm and that we are somehow alien to the natural realm or we're somehow
different from it.
And maybe that's also the best thing because it means we're questioning who we are and
even if we're getting it wrong and even if we're thinking we're special in a way that
we're not, I mean, at least we're asking the question.
So, the best thing is also the worst thing and let the alien ponder that and sort it
out.
Awesome.
you
