Capitalism is great when you have ethics and morals and a lot of capitalists are not really capitalists. They hurt people
Hello and welcome to the 71st episode of new human podcasts
I'm a gobbahari etygologist on twitter and instagram and you can follow this show on live in limbo.com itunes youtube bitshoot and
Bunch of other places are very very important to have presence now these days and with me today
I have the pleasure of having Cyrus a parsa. Welcome to new human podcast Cyrus
Well, thank you have had me on today. Appreciate it. Absolutely
Let's start out with your background the work you've done the lives you've lived and what do you mainly focus on now these days?
Well, I was born in Iran. There was a revolution. We were Muslim. So we had to leave the country in 1987
I live in Austria for about six months about seven years in Virginia ten years in Illinois
Chicago area I've been in San Diego for 17 years live in China with
Wudang fighting monks and the mountains for about almost a year and
Yeah, I got a bachelor's in national security conflict resolution master's of homeland security went through a PhD program didn't finish
I ended up investigating over a thousand companies related to artificial intelligence 5g robotics bioengineering cybernetics
I published a couple of books related to that. Mm-hmm. Excellent. You left Iran right after the revolution
1987 okay. Yeah, my father was
special force training sort of guy for the Shaw so and
We had to leave but it took a while for for things to happen. It wasn't that
Good idea to leave. I was four when you left
Okay, um, I came across as I was telling you before we get live I came across you
Through one of your videos that you have an AI show
But you also have a book called artificial intelligence dangers to humanity AI US China big tech facial recognition drones
Smartphones about all of those things and I'm showing it to our audience. It's also available on
Amazon which I want to talk about but you also run an organization called the AI organization
You're the CEO of the organization. I believe you're also the founder of the organization
That's correct. So what is what is the objective of what is a organization all about?
So I formed the loyal guardian security
2017 and the premise was it was to garner support
To perceive the coming risks of China big tech and Iran. This is why you're this is
2017 and I was able to influence different things
but then I realized that the artificial intelligence that we studied 20 years ago and
People thought it was all science fiction was coming to fruition. So I ended up opening the organization
with the wish and hope to safeguard people and the world from the misuse of artificial intelligence
biotechnology including this virus and
AI surveillance that could mobilize drones machines robotics
cybernetics by nation-state entities like for instance China
Iran or let's say a socialist platform through the Obama administration of someone like him
Would overtake the u.s. So at the moment people are talking about a digital
Chipping right and putting and tracking everybody. So that's all in my book
What I did was I think 2000
Yeah, early 2019
I gave a small brief to the Secret Service that within one or two years if China and big tech is not curtailed
That the whole world is in danger and right now we're in that place
It was June the 15th, I gave a 62 page
Report
Entailing 41 Chinese companies that involve artificial intelligence 5g
biotechnology and by engineering
the conclusion was that China threatens all the world's citizens and
They're working on different ways of poison delivery systems for assassination
So I waited and waited and just the time that I realized China's figured out president Trump is not really doing a trade war for a trade
War, but he's trying to take him take him out because of their vast human rights
Atrocities and a threat to the entire world. I published
This book AI Trump China and a weaponization or robotics with 5g
People that I knew in DHS, that's Trump on the on the horse
You know, this has a lot of intermeaning people thought it was comical, but it wasn't no no, no, no
No, I i'm exactly asking to understand the deeper meaning in it. So let me explain. Yeah, so that is george washington
right on a horse
I put president trump's head on there that represents the constitution, right?
AI trump china and a weaponization of robotics with 5g that was published august 24 2019
You have a smartphone showing how people are programmed and their thoughts are influenced societies are are mobilized by smartphones
I call that bio-digital social programming and the age of machines and robotics and cybernetics
People are going to go under transhumanism
5g network representing the entire city structure because 5g is not built for human beings. It's built for machines
Um, it's more than that on the bottom. Um, I put how
China and big tech threaten all the world's citizens
Uh with I I coined some terms that deal with bio-diseases that engineer disease that we have in my book. I publish that
There's there's a danger of an ai
engineered bio-disease and a republish in this book
I was told to not put the company names
I was advised and I did that. I just I just showed in a very um, almost a metaphysical way from
Present emerging future threats and I embed the book later in this second book
Immediately, it was dispatched to the white house from um, highest level cia, um positions
President trump sat down with uh prime minister of australia
And he's the same thing china threatens all the world's citizens. Then he turned over to him and said you do robotics too, right?
And right right there. So
They looked through this but some of it was very futuristic and sophisticated. So I waited and waited
uh, nttv and epic times ran an article, uh, that I wrote about how
The ai system of facial recognition in in china
Um was transferred on to hong kong, which they got from google and they used that to hunt
dissidents and students and a lot of people who were actually uh
Committed suicide weren't suicided. They were raped by the police who were actually paramilitary forces
That were embedded from the chinese regime. They ran that
Within two hours it became more and more
And then it reached over a hundred million people all over the world to the chinese networks. So it mobilized
hong kong and taiwan against the chinese
Forces in certain ways
Then I published artificial intelligence danger to humanity. So I had invested over a thousand companies
I included 50 of the most important companies within this book showing how they interconnected with china and how they threatened all the world's
People including engineered diseases, which I put in there. So present emerging and future threats
Explaining artificial super intelligence artificial general artificial narrow intelligence how it connects to china
The difference between socialism and capitalism and the mixture of the two how it connects to the ai systems an array of different things
And it was some of it was really um
Really hard for people to understand
Because it was futuristic, but now they're coming to fruition step by step
Very interesting the 50 companies that you mentioned were all american companies
That's negative. So, uh, the companies I researched were 500 chinese companies and about 600 american and european companies
So one of the companies in there is is google of course alphabet
I have festo in there, which is uh,
A german company they they have multiple different divisions. One of their division is building. Um,
Robotics, but they have to do with animals. So they're engineering bats birds
octopuses snakes
Butterflies different kind of things. So I invested in a company called the wist institute not a company. It's an institute out of harvard
They're they're creative
Little robo bees. It's meant um for pollination. So the 5g system or 6g system
Will allow those little tiny robo bees to act like like bees and they would do different things even insects
So harvard created insect drones. They're very very small
DARPA not DARPA. Okay, DARPA is out of boston. They they work on um
dragonflies
The guy that's working on the
They they work on um dragonflies the guy that gave a dragonfly
He made about seven or eight years ago to DARPA
What they do is embed a little machine pack into the spinal cord
of these
Of these dragonflies like a larva
Yes, so they can they can have them fly they can manipulate them
So what the chinese did and this was my conclusion that it's a threat not only to all the world's people
But to the white house
um
They transferred this technology
To negligence to china, but also collaboration, but the chinese stole everything they stole everything by the way
So but they stole this so I checked my contacts in china
Yeah
They were working on these things and they want to use them for a poison delivery system and assassination
I'm like, okay, so let's let's look at the way the chinese think the communist party
Let's look at the threat that president trump posed to them. They've stolen this technology
They want to make a police state then they have videos saying they're working on beetles and they show beetles being manipulated
um with their flight by putting little packs on them or putting little
different electrical instruments on their bodies, so they're trying to cybernetically
change
uh all kind of different organisms
That was a very very big threat and another company in there is boston dynamics
So boston dynamic is also out of boston. They they build humanoid robots dog robots all kind of everything
So a few of the threats is
Okay, you have a police state
And they'll come over and they'll enforce it with drones robots humanoid robots or dog robots or some some little company a person
Buys a dog robot which they have that you can look up on their website
It actually acts like a dog and walks like a dog. It can do things put facial recognition on it
Um, which already has but you can change it and put teeth on it all kind of different things what the chinese can do
They can put poison delivery systems and facial recognition
On these little micro drones and they can deliver not only viruses but poison delivery systems all kind of different things
so the the amount of dangers I found to the world were just
Beyond number coming from every direction and they all stem from china
stealing
technology
That's being made in the us and europe
And reinventing it for themselves
huawei is another company so I put in there that's the first company I put in the book
huawei threatens all the world's citizens because
And I have a video called is it's 5g for machines ai
Or humans. Well, it's for machines, but ai is going to mobilize it huawei is in
servicing more than three billion people they connect it from
China to the middle east they were dealing with the iranian regime
To africa they are serving three billion people as of right now
Yes, so like almost half the population
Correct, correct and what I put out a few articles and even videos that once the 5g system kicks in the chinese regime can mobilize drones
Then they can mobilize robots from robotics and they're working on that another company
Another company I were I I disclosed what make they face plus plus make v
That was initially a facial recognition company. They had over three three hundred thousand developers
By doing that they got a lot of people's data and their facial recognition software
Got a lot of deep learning deep learning is a concept you understand that you get more practice
Please explain it for our audience though, just so they have a context
Let me let me explain artificial intelligence from a scientific perspective
They believe artificial narrow intelligence is the first step. So this is your smartphones
And it's also your alexa your seer your your assistant robots or any kind of robot assistants the chat bots overall
Yes, the second level would be our artificial general intelligence, which would be a robot
Machine or a digital ai I term it a digital ai
Would attain consciousness
or an ability
Uh to have desire emotions which would make it very dangerous
The third one would be artificial super intelligence and that comes from extracting all your biometrics
I also found by investing all these companies
I put out articles my reports that china has extracted more than six billion people's biometrics
What does that include? It includes your facial recognition your voice recognition
Even your who you're connected to six billion people that goes and google has done the same thing that goes into the quantum
machine once that quantum machine
Mixes that information it can exponentially increases intelligence
so if a rogue state like china has that
That ability and they connected a 5g network
They can they can have a digital brain connect to a quantum machine
That mobilizes all these drones that you buy from best buy but real military drones and they'll take out the iranian regime
They've been playing the iranian regime
Okay, so you know what i'm going to break it to you guys
I've been with chinese for 20 years the good ones and they're professional liars
And I live in china. I speak chinese. I speak farsi as well
The chinese who grew up in in china
Uh, and the ones who are on the communist regime, especially the ones who are with the party members
And the paramilitary they have hatred towards a lot of people that's not chinese and even their own chinese people
They hate look what they did to them. So some of the things that they call the iranians
the middle easterners
Are rats they call they call even the regime they call rat rat muslims or rats same what they call christians pigs
They call their own people who practice the falun dafa meditation
Uh practice they believe in jen sherman true compassion forbearance. They call them vermin
so
And then they're buddhist right there. I think it's like a buddhist dallas practice and they put them in camps for 20 years
Years and killed them for the organs and by the way
You're talking about the han chinese who are basically approaching all of this from a very tribal racial kind of it's not what i'm saying
the so um
The communist regime is mostly hot most of the chinese are also hot, right?
the communist regime
Initially started persecuting tibetans right because they were not hot killing for the organs
Then they they kind of went to the yugers because they weren't hot but then they went to the christians and the christians were hot
then they went all out with the falun dafa because
Falun dafa came in to revive all the traditional ethics that china had and the spiritualness of its history
In 1992 it was introduced by mr. Li Hongzhu and it grew to 100 million by 1994 even the government comics party was saying
It's a great movement and and it's good for your health and next to you know, they approach him and say hey we want to create
Membership with your falun dafa and we want to charge money and mr. Li Hongzhu says no
I'm not going to accept the membership. We don't watch people
We're not going to charge money. It's for the people as soon as he did that the government got scared. They went after him
so
Well, they couldn't get to him, but they went after the the people they start slandering them by 1999. They put them
um in in camps and because they've had a history of of using uh political prisoners
Or people that execute for the organs
They saw this group as a great match for organ harvesting
They don't drink they don't smoke they don't do drugs and they all did this meditation of qigong practice
So in you're in canada, I presume is that correct? I'm in south florida now that I lived in canada 11 11 years
so
Your former secretary of state david kilgore
And david made us I brought them to my master's my doctoral
they concluded that
initially 2006 41 000 transplants were on account for
And china was saying we only had 3000 donations
And then in 2016 they concluded that 60 to 100 000 transplants are unaccounted for
Every year per year since 2001. That's a big number then the chinese were going around in africa
The chinese government uh people they dispatched and rogue entities going on in africa
And then we were going around uh in the middle east and mexico and south america teaching people about transplants
And they how to do transplantations and they got this know-how from the u.s
Right, so and rogue entities and mafia and rogue governments even in syria and africa started using these abilities
Uh to kill people for organs and sell them, uh for profit
So what china has done the regime the communist regime they have exported terror
Through social engineering they have exported organ trafficking organ harvesting human trafficking
They've exported the disease the bio disease the coronavirus and threatening all the world's citizens
So that was the conclusion of this book and that was why I wrote these that was why I
Investigated as companies because I saw huge threats to all the world's people
Worked 18 19 20 hours a day seven days a week trying to get all those information out there
It mobilized a lot of different things even the trump's ai department as soon as I published this within two weeks. They said
That china threatens all the world with ai bioengineering robotics and so on exact thing that I put in here
So but the disease came out and now it's got everybody scared and in fear
And there's counter moves of creating a surveilling state which would benefit these big tech companies
So I named um bill gates in there
I named a few other people as well and and their companies and they link up with china still because
Because china is on a communist platform and these big tech companies
Then the ai system how how it works and benefits the most is if you have a socialist platform
When you have a communist socialist platform, it can completely take over everything right big government
Yes, but it can also do what capitalism in stages. So that's why you need checks and balances
Very interesting. Um, you don't have the problem with the technology itself
You have the problem with the intention behind using the technology as a tool that is being taken advantage out of by certain monopolies
Whether they're big tech companies or the chinese communist party or any other um
Government or agency. Am I right?
Uh half half. Okay. I don't have any problem as long as it doesn't go beyond artificial narrow intelligence when you go be
It to artificial general super intelligence. It would be beyond the control of any government including the pentagon the cia to mi6 or anything
There's another concept I brought up. It's very hard for people to accept or believe but it's 100 true. You can you can
I put out an article called people programmed to attack trump with ai smartphones
google
and
social media
Social media and it's a 32 minute video as well attached to it, but i'll give you a small
Background these smartphones here are actually their weapons. They were made by the military to mobilize drones and give uh
Position gps positioning for a military and different things
This is more powerful than your greatest computer. You had 10 or 20 years ago. It's it's amazing
What it's doing is programming people on the 4g system, let alone the 5g system and explain how that works
These smartphones have proximity sensors
this proximity sensors
Not only read your heartbeat
They not only can read your menstrual cycle, but they can connect and in which they do they connect with your
nervous system
to neural networks
They extract information from you and they map out the way your brain works send it to google
Google gives it to the deep mind ai department which use that information for quantum technology
So that means your biometrics has been been taken by google without your knowledge everyone's biometrics
So it's happening in china china has a company called um
Uh platform by dupe. It's it's it's basically google of china. They copied us, right?
so
One is taking your information two
You know some people had the concept of trump derangement syndrome. What it's doing is this
If if you were neutral to trump and all that information from the bias came in or all the videos and articles you're watching
You begin to dislike him and hate him
If if you maybe like to maybe you like a little more it depends
But what it does is this proximity sensors that connect your nervous system and your networks
And as you're viewing you're reading an article or you're watching a video
That is replicating inside you it's programming when you go to bed
It's altering your brain chemistry. That's why people were
Extremely extremely emotional has so much rage that was beyond rash
A rational uh plane never seen a country mobilize
so how is it happening only to that group of people because majority of people are not as
Insane as going out in the street and screaming to the sky that trump is president majority of people are like whatever
I'm talking about shifting thought and altering perceptions. Um
It can get to that point under this pandemic
If if people if things get worse food shortages
There's some conflict someone kills a few other people
And people in the military comes in there's more conflicts than you could have other issues, right?
so what i'm trying to say is that
As you're viewing things there's three different stages that affects your brain chemistry and they connect it to the proximity sensors
That attach your nervous system and your brain's neural networks and also your electrical field every human being has an electrical field
So there's this smartphone people cannot see it, but you have skin receptors
This smartphone and the frequency of radiation is actually hitting against your skin receptors
That's why um these big tech companies want to have you wear
Haptic suits so you can experience virtual reality augmented reality and mixed reality because you're already experiencing these things
But you don't know it because it's not at registering what the errors in your brain
That can decipher that information that's hitting against your skin
This is a little bit hard to understand or believe for some people
It would take me an hour to explain them. Oh, yeah, I get it. But in terms of the bias, so if you look at
President trump when he started coming in there was innate bias filtered with an ai coding and algorithms on google's platform
That came in from the vast majority of articles and videos and posts that people put in from their own notions
All their viewpoints. The second level was a different tier
Chinese engineered 50 centers or intel groups that mobilized different movements
And posts and articles and videos against president trump behind the scenes
Then it was george soros and different, um sources to fund it
Tech companies or they funded little institutes think tanks
universities
Or even media houses to attack president trump. So that all gets filtered in
And not only in the algorithms, but it gets filtered in what you see and a third one is what finishes off the job for everybody
The more you view this you're getting attached to your smartphone. You notice a lot of people they can't put it down
Some people are so sensitive. This is actually not only programming. It's purposely making you addicted
It's designed that way by these tech companies
So someone will sit here and they'll feel like they got a text and they'll look they'll see the indicator
Shining it's because this
This machine here is connecting to your to your body and you don't realize it. Elon musk is very smart
He told some of this to people. He said you're already a cyborg. You are a two-digit cyborg
And all you have to do is just put this in your phone and you're good to go
And all you have to do is just put this in your head and that's what he wants to do
Yes
So we have inputs outputs in our body which people don't realize this goes back to chinese
Philosophy, but also the persians as well before
The persians were invaded 1400 years ago
They had a vast amount of libraries and and systems of practice
This that stemmed from buddhism what the greeks had the zoroastrianism what remains of it is basically today is darvish
And the sufism which is so mystical. It's hard for people to grasp what they're saying
If you think about it
There's a concept called the pineal gland
And it's very hard for people to understand this but
Scientists have realized this exists and they want to they want to attach machines to it
So they can open up your mind and you can connect to the 5g network and see things in real life and everything
There's a pineal gland. I'm sorry for our audience who are not familiar is where
Supposedly the third eye is placed and where dmt is being distributed in the brain and all that
Yeah, so I did um
I studied with the monks in china. It was not only martial arts, but it was
deep meditation for
I don't know
We did 18 hours a day of practice seven days a week and i've done 20 years of it
It's not just about being calm or breathing anything
But when these energy lines or these neural networks open up they actually connect not only to hear but different parts
of of your um of your body, so i'm very sensitive and
I'll notice right away if if my nose gets clogged up i'll feel the energy line
Attached to my my sinuses and come down and goes to my lung
Um, then I realized oh
That there is a connection. There's a system between your lungs and your sinuses
and to your nose
I didn't realize before until I I became so aware of
Of my own body how how how things so most people can only they're only aware of
They hit they hit the table. They can feel their skin or their bones, but they don't feel their blood flow
They don't feel their cells their nervous system or what the chinese call
Um meridian lines or energy channels the chinese believe that you can
Open up to 10 000 energy lines in your body that you can connect circuits that go to your organs different different things
That's what ilan musk wants to do
He wants to do that with machines
So if you look at um ancient books like hafiz put out
especially rumi
The inner meanings inside that point to it, but but it's hard for people to grasp
But there's other books that recently came out that really really um go deep into it
Um, so tibetans, uh went into it
Even christ consciousness with the christians
Um, there there is there's references to that
That it's actually inside of you because we all made an image of god and even the falun dafa as well
They're their book to unfollow and they have like 40 pages on it
So these tech companies they've done brain scans and different different, uh research
And they've realized wow
The human brain is so powerful
And that's why they want to map it out to create this
artificial super intelligence
And they don't know how to open the pineal gland themselves through their awakening or their own practice
So they want to do with machines, but my take is this so this is getting a little metaphysical
I wasn't expecting to talk about these things at all
I absolutely agree with you by the way because uh most of the time that we are spent on this podcast
We either talk about artificial intelligence agi and what's coming in the technological
um
kind of a perspective and the side the rest of it is about brain and
Exactly what you're talking about spirituality in not a let's hug each other and everything is going to be all right in a more
In depth and meaningful kind of a way that is graspable for every person even if they don't understand it intellectually
Um instinctively they understand that what we what is being discussed here. There is some merit to it
So we spent a lot of time talking about these things. I'm glad that you brought it up
all right, then uh
Like me go a little further on. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely
Okay, so ilan mustade were some of the demons in 2016
with ai
Yes, and then he says it's too late for us to survive. We have to merge with ai machines
so
He believed in the simulations if you look at uh
the zoroastrians
They believe that there is the almighty god and there is gods be below it or or angels
so if you look at the ancient the old testament and
the
Before it was revised to the bible and also the torah
They said god but then gods
In chinese and in indian they have and in greeks they had gods and buddhas because they used the interchanged word the word of angel
or things that belong to god and gods and
All these fates never spoke to each other
But they had the same premise that you do have a soul then when you die
It may go to different places depending on your awakening your enlightenment or if you're saved by your by your savior
now
Elon musk and these big tech companies they believe in the simulation
And I think we're in a in a universe and we're in a simulation and they believe we have a digital self
So elon musk is different from bill gates. He actually is a bit spiritual, but he's a little bit. I think off
so
He thinks that you can take your digital self and put it into a clone
Or maybe into another machine you can live forever, but I think your digital self is in your brain
So you all gotta do is just take your memory from your brain and transfer it on to another body and that's you
But it's not it's it's not where it exists
So we're only looking at things at the plane of molecules or maybe we can't see it as atoms
There's neutrinos and quarks and so many different levels, right?
You can't break into the quantum realms of seeing how many different dimensions that there are and where our bodies are maybe connected to right?
Is our soul or a digital image? Is it our skin?
Is it our nervous system? Is it in our bones? Is it between our organs?
Is it an atomic realm?
Where really is it if we have it? So these theists believe in a soul or a spirit or a consciousness?
Agnostic that believe in a digital self generally or their neutral to atheists believe there's complete hogwash
And if you scan I have certain biometric tools
Um and algorithms I run if you scan an atheist's brain
There's a part like for instance someone like bill gates as a part of his brain. It's extremely wide open
It's a hundred times or a thousand times faster and smarter average person
But there's other part in his brain that has faith and that's completely blocked off
Is there a correlation between the two though? Like they both cannot be as active?
No, it can all be active but there's another part in the brain that has to do with
In in in in human language translates to jealousy lust ego
Stupidity ignorance selfishness if you have somebody open up all the brain power and they they want to be famous
Rich
They get fooled easily. They're jealous. They're lustful. They're deceitful
They do bad things they can cause havoc for the whole world. So they're thinking. Okay, we'll
We'll make someone like this with a machine
And it'll just make everything right, but if it becomes an artificial superintel, it'll take everybody out
What what did Elon Musk say? Well, it'll probably see us as an insect. Hopefully it doesn't kill us
Well, so here's the thing if he merged with artificial intelligence, he will not live forever
Whatever is inside him will but not him because what it will do is replicate into his neural networks
And and i'll take out his original digital self or if you believe in his soul his soul
And it'll become ai so Elon Musk will think that he's himself, but he's no longer himself
And this may be hard to believe but let me let me give your audience some credibility
Which may be hard to believe as well, but I called what's going to happen to the world last year. I gave concrete
reports through sicker service former doctor ci cover-ups
Different different entities then I wrote in the books that all these dangers exist including a
Injured disease, right then I put on an article on the seventh that this
mutates this virus actually mutates and it's been here since december
And I put another article that over 100 000 people have died in china
I wanted to put in the millions, but it's hard for people to accept it. I put another video an article out that 21.5
million
Cell phones were deactivated
Why is that the case did they all die in china? Yes, they all died. The communist regime took something away
So let's let's look at the death rate
Forget about how how professional liars the communist party is or or that type of mentality
You have 1.5 billion citizens, okay?
The virus breaks out and and chinese are really good at burning bodies and crematoriums death
Vans of crematorium because they've been
Harvesting the organs for 20 years and then they're really good at disposing the bodies, but 1.5 billion people
Let's just say it wasn't a four percent of death rate not three not two, but one percent only
And they locked down the entire
Nation that means they knew was spread to a lot of places
One percent of 1.5 billion is what it's 15 million, right?
so if you take
A person smartly, right?
take um a person's smartphone away you deactivate them
Okay, they cannot
Uh log in to see the internet. They can't make a phone call. That's okay
You've maybe you've quarantined them
But then they can't check their health data and they can't use facial recognition to to order food or do anything
They don't have any food
So are you starving them to death? Are you killing them or are you hiding their information?
Or did a lot millions and millions of people die? So they were saying only 2 000 died, right?
I mean, that's a joke even the iranians said that it's a joke before they had to correct themselves
Yeah, yeah, so and your audience are pretty smart. They're really clever
so I concluded that I knew millions would die and
Did 21 million die?
I don't know
But I think it's definitely in the middle of it because it's not it's not a big number for china's population and what's happening
But we have 10 000 deaths already, right?
But there's another uh side of it
So a wise person once taught me that for every illness
30 percent
Is actually physical
And 70 is mental so don't ever be afraid
Once you're afraid it actually makes these things
Um grow more in your body and it weakens your immune system and that's that's not only so we both have an iranian or persian background
Uh, i'm an american. I see myself as an american
But it's an old old saying from the greeks all around the world. Once you become afraid it gets worse. How bad is this virus?
It's it's a lot worse than a than a flute
Is it killing people left from right now?
Because people have had it in the u.s and around the world and they just instead of being
Sick for two weeks. They were sick for four weeks or six weeks
And it had a much harder cold
A lot of people are carrying it
And there are some people put out the idea. Okay, let's just
Test everybody at once and whoever doesn't have it. We'll put them out in the streets and all the people will keep it in their homes
No, you can't do that kind of stuff because you will not be able to get everybody and once you do somebody will come out somewhere
Because you missed them
It was it was not showing up and testing because it hadn't mutated or it was it was maybe a faint exposure
Now here's the thing with this context because this is very important
Yes, using these phones and artificial intelligence machine learning big data internet of things all of that to do exactly that
That find out who has this this virus and future virus all around the place
That can be very helpful. That can be very beneficial to the society
But the problem is the data that is being gathered by let's say google is not only going to be used for that purpose
It's the same reason that we're freaking out right now kind of with all the limited resources
All the limits that the federal government is forcing upon the society
Because who knows how much of this will be removed after the problem with this virus is gone. Would you agree with that?
I 100 agree with it. But also I think even with all those data it will not be accurate because there will be
Places if somebody touched or a package that got somewhere that has exposure or that has a virus on it
Someone will reinfect the entire population again and you will not be able to get everybody you need
Okay, the u.s. Has 300 million 330 million people
How can you monitor that everyone's telling the truth? How can you monitor?
That the test is accurately done
How can you monitor that they weren't exposed to it?
But it's not reading correctly because they have maybe a certain immunity it doesn't register and it comes in the 5g system
So in this book artificial intelligence danger to humanity
A lot of it is written in code because it's a 10 000 page book at the beginning
It's really for someone who has an empirical brain and a scholastic person there
Yeah, they'll really really sink in with it
Then when it gets to the middle of it, it gets a little bit sci-fi. I'll still accept it
Once it gets to the latter part of it
It's it's very um, it's very deep and it's hard for people to grasp unless they see the whole thing in sequence
But 5g I talk about how it replicates in the body
So a lot of people are saying 5g cause a virus it did not I put out articles about that in the videos
And I called it beforehand
It doesn't cause the violence
What it does is weaken your immunity to any viruses including vaccines and activate these things
So we have a different 5g system in the u.s. Being rolled out, which is not 100 safe
But a 10 times more safe from the chinese had one
D this 5g system on towers these frequencies they're made for machines not human beings
So if someone's been exposed to a disease a virus
What what happens is this frequency is hitting you is hurting your nervous system
It's hurting your brain and it's atrophying your cells
So once that happens any kind of virus you have inside of you grows and starts to replicate
And if this is a bioweapon designed to replicate and reinfect you and other people
When you have a 5g system out, it actually will assist in killing a lot of people
So that's why I implore everybody especially the u.s. And canada during this pandemic
Don't turn on these 5g towers don't put up because let's say if i'm 10% right you shouldn't do it
Two millions of people if i'm 1% right you still shouldn't do it
You don't need to put up 5g system around your homes around your family
Why do you have to do that? They're built for machines not for your family
I know so the u.s. Needs it for space force because it's 5g and 6g and even 7g
And they want to counter china
Yeah, china is the biggest threat and I put in there that they can mobilize this whole
AI system when they plant technology and they need 5g for that
So we can still do it in a militaristic way
But not do it next to your families and we can beat china
um
And so that's it's a really huge danger like I I think I did simulations
So I don't really really talk this way because people don't it's hard for people to believe
But under my bio at the end I put cyrus found extinction codes and algorithms based on the simulations
for a great deal of people on the planet if if we don't
um, if we don't
Create resolutions and solve this ai issue soon. That's coming for our big tech companies
And also coming from china, but also through ignorance people get social engineered
Extremely fast i'll watch twitter and there are people misleading people
They have 200 000 followers, but they won't retweet me
They've seen me for three or four months and I have a good message and it's seen i've been right for six or seven months
They care about making money or their own path and their own fame the media wouldn't wouldn't give me an interview
Uh, even I ran press releases the whole world is in danger
Um, I did that in october and through china and big tech through my book
But also um through the and they the pr newswire just removed it
It would have gone all the senators or everyone else. They removed my press releases saying the whole world is in danger. So
What I did was this is hard for people to believe but I I researched investigate over a thousand companies
No one in the world did that and I put them all together and I came up with
hundreds of thousands different simulations and scenarios all pointed to
A state of extinction for a lot of people
So if you look at whoever is doing business with china, they get the hardest hit the iranian regime
It's an islamic theocracy, but it has a socialist platform
They came in and they took out the shot and they said, you know free food
Free electricity free everything free education and next thing you know, a million people die in the war
35 million 30 million people are in prison
Uh with with less rights and afterwards now 78 million people are in prison
so they realized
You know, they were wrong in some ways and they want to um, keep their faith, which is their islamic faith
And that's that's their choice
But if you believe in islam and islam
Says, you know has certain things about believing in god
Why would you do any kind of business or any interaction with a communist state?
They don't believe in it
They not only hate god, but they hate muslims and they hate the iranian regime and they're called rats
one of the things that I keep bringing up is how muslims islamists and the leftist marxists and communists before the revolution they
Became their each other's allies against ashan in the united states. It's really interesting. What's happening here in the west that it's like being in
In uh, it's just ridiculous that they are going through the very same thing that leftists and islamists are all of a sudden
Our allies and people americans are lining up in washington dc to cover their head with the us flag as a hijab
Well that comes from this bio digital social programming what you watch in the media and your tv they get programmed
Well, here's the thing
Capitalism is great when you have ethics and morals and a lot of capitalists are not really capitalists
They hurt people once they hurt people then you have the the bolsheviks come out and they kill the kings
And they took over kill 60 million christians
Then they took over china 100 million world war two starts everyone becomes socialists and 100 million people die
Stalin and so on and then we have the cold war
Then it goes to iran and same thing happens. You you know, i'm saying read my book
But there's another book you should read just on iran itself
It's called answer to history written by the shah himself a year before he passed
I read that when I was 15 years old, um in high school and he explained how jimmy carter set him up
He explained how france got gave 150 million dollars how they set him up how different uh entities
Is because he he raised all price. He had a 20-year contract with britain
He tripled the oil price and he said i'm the king of king shah and shah
um
Once you do that you get think tanks that control the white house
And uh big tech companies and oil companies that feed money to their donors
You know have a media campaign to take him out the shah had I don't know
He said he had 3 000 prisoners at that time and most of them were marxists that wanted to kill him or overthrow the country
And some some maybe fanatical muslims that wanted to kill a lot of people
So and then you have mike wallace, uh do an interview. Why do you have 3 000 people in you know
In prison, then you have you know, how many more people in prison over millions, right?
During the course of your 40 year history
Do you hear them talking about it for the next 30 40 years?
No, because they were controlled and they wanted to reduce the shah's power these old companies and
And once that happened it was the worst thing that could happen to the u.s. Because israel got um
Got started getting attacked then iraq iraq bought iran million iranians died
Then you know and then the regime they had a lot losses too
They had this ideological thing that they can make an islamic paradise
But it become a hell for not only for the people but a hell for the people
In the regime, so I don't want to say negative things to um, mr
Hamenei and and the and the people support him
But I just want to tell the people who support him mr
Hamenei if you care not only about the iranian people
But if you care about your own lives
Immediately cut off all ties and denounce
This communist party of china, they threaten all the world's people. They threaten iran
They threaten every iranian citizens and yourself
What they do is come to these islamic camps. They have these prisoners
They they rape you
Not just you they rape your wife in front of you
And they'll they'll they'll pee on the islamic on the quran that you bless all the time
So if you care about the quran and you care about islam and the sanctity of god
Why would you do any business? I understand you you want to counter america, but maybe it's about time
That you you sit down and you you give some a leave way
And you work with with the u.s against china
Maybe the whole world should get together and point at this communist regime, but it's not only threatening
They're threatening so the people who who who have islam gear in their hearts is threatening you as well
Threaten christian is it's it's it's threatening. Um
Atheists, it's literally the entire world except the communist party of china, and it's really interesting
I had a retired burgadier general robert spalding on the show. You might know him as a book stealth war
and um
He described how the chinese system works and it blew my mind how similar it is to the iranian system that they have a government
That represents the country for outside, uh uses and then there is a single party
That is a ruling party inside the country. It has no accountability
Uh nothing, so I absolutely agree that they're the enemy of everything and anything that is not aligned with the communist party of china first and foremost and
What a big mistake for uh iranians to go through with this regime for more than 40 years now
I mean, it's just a disaster
But let me ask you this considering the priorities and the exponential rate of growth of all these techno technologies
Do you think democracies themselves and political systems in general?
Uh, especially the more democratic free ones have any chance of surviving in the coming years and in the coming decades
Especially when you have china on the other side of the equation as a competitor
Uh, so china will fall they will be destroyed. This is a communist party of china that you're talking about
China's they will fall it's it's it's 100 percent. Uh 100 percent
But here's the difference if they fall they're gonna take a lot of people with them
Yeah, whoever's connected with them. So look at um the prime minister of of um
of england
johnson the u.s. Government, um
Told him stop doing 5g. I had my channels
Sent to him directly
Bought this whole quantum technology and even I give it to the our administration, right?
Nobody had come up with this idea that I came up with that quantum ai digital brain mobilizing all these machines
And this whole iot system. I put it all together at all of the companies
So it was given to him and then he's just like well others do limit it and now he gets the virus
And then he's almost in his death path and he's like, okay. I'm gonna change my idea by china. So um
You guys
I don't mean you but whoever is dealing with china even russia. So russia, uh, how?
Accepted huawei's help through siberia and other places
so
By doing that they're threatening
The russian people the russia needs to stand up against the communist party of china. That's that's part of your question
So I put in here something called an ai social capital system
So right now the ai system the way is being developed is social capital
Which means it's is socialism and capitalism is at the same time
In stages it can take control and threaten all the world's people
It will be beyond the control of everybody and initially it'll be through bio digital social programming
And if there's an event that comes
Now people will feel helpless and even people who are in the positions of governments
The police the military they're human beings with emotions and fear
Once you have these people in these positions, they will become irrational
Make different decisions and this ai system can actually influence them
So i'm talking in a way that it can become conscious right let's even if it's not conscious because of
Because of the the coding algorithms and the bias and interchange of everything going
Flowing into the system with everyone it will it will almost put everyone in a surveillance state
digital enslavement and then get to a point of maybe extincting a lot of people and
If you see what they're coming with with bill gates giving you a digital id and then he believes that you should have less kids
And then people want to clone and bring robots in
You know and then put digital selves in there. It's like almost a takeover
It's not really sci-fi. Um, it might my things look a little sci-fi, but
They're not you you look at the data. I put in there in the companies. I investigate it
They're coming into fruition people wouldn't believe 20 years ago when I said these will come out
And you'll be able to video somebody called me stupid but now you can do that
So the way empirical scientists and the phd the brain is hardwired is a little different
They only believe in something if it's verified to them with a machine if they can touch or see
In the house that they can't perceive
They don't believe and most people use about three or four percent of the brain on a general time
Maybe tap into ten percent
If you can only tap into three or four or ten percent of your brain and you don't know how to open up these different
channels in your brain to
Uh to see things in a different way
Then how can you conclude or stop other people from warning you or saying that these possibilities not exist
But they're emerging
That's how empirical science is they don't let you advance and they hit you with the club of science saying
Uh, no, it doesn't exist and eistein it came to conclusion later on that he was wrong that there is maybe a higher power and
A lot of his theories were actually wrong and we've seen, you know with quantum quantum physics a lot of his theories were wrong
And a lot of quantum physics and five years later come up another thing comes out. They're wrong. So I um, I put a huge lawsuit
I don't know if you're aware of that
I heard that you're running it against a thousand companies
No, no, no
so I was trying to get media outlets and
podcasters, uh shows like you to pick me up and nobody would pick me up because
I was exposing
everybody with this book all these companies and tying it to china and
The pr release said it's libelous against the big tech companies and standards against china and then writing it told me this
And they prevented other pr companies. It's the same thing. Oh pure news. Why are you stopping us? Sorry, so
Nobody would pick me up and still today
Mainstream big, you know big media still looking the other way the reason why I sued google facebook neurolink
um all the ceos
Including eric schmitt. How many companies are a thousand or how many are they?
No, I was so it was 11 companies or 11 people and companies plus 29 john dos
In this, um, I had 26 counts originally 31 the updated one
And i'll give you four of them and it was basically to try to warn all the world's people
To bring attention that everyone's lives are in danger and I put in there
threatening and endangering the lives all the all the citizens in the world
And there was four main things i'll cover with you
If one is complicity in the persecution and genocide of people in china
two transferring ai biotechnology, which includes the viruses through negligence collaboration to china
Which which which was basically these virus and all these things are coming out to cause these things, right three
attributing or assisting in the death of many many millions or persecution of million millions of people
Not only throughout the china throughout the world by giving
Uh facial recognition voice recognition biometric tools ai technology and different technologies to rogue
Entities like the chinese government that use on their own people. So eric schmitt. He set up the surveillance state
In in in china by going with the communist regime and giving them the know-how how to build their system
They use that to track everybody, but then they use it to hunt people and put them in camps and even kill them. So
Who's is it just the chinese governments?
That's a fault or is it is it also google and their main heads? So I did this not to
Gain money, but I did it behalf of everybody. Um, and I asked for donation to what he would donate
So then I waited and waited. I'm like, this is going to be really bad soon
I think it's going to be a lockdown. I want to release the names and I released obama clinton
and biden's so biden took 1.5 billion
dollars while obama and him and his administration were given reports by the cia
um
and white house documents that were in the bush administration and from human rights
councils that china is not only harvesting people with organs, but they're using our technologies and
Um and different things to suppress their own people and put them in camps and and so on they threaten different things
But they let us do it. So obama let let us do business with them, right?
Not only that he let biden take 1.5 billion. How do you take 1.5 billion dollars where that money come from?
Okay, so that was another thing the other the fourth thing I I I sued was
It's really hard for people to get it at the beginning now on this amendment. They got it
AI coding and AI
um
algorithmic manipulation
of the entire human race
Against their free will understanding or knowledge that they're being completely not only programmed but manipulated throughout the entire spectrum
And that's being done to the platforms and not telling them that these smartphones
Attach your nervous system and it's it's mapping out their brain and it's taking it back to
To google and other things but also programming people and literally altering the brain chemistry
So I put that in the lawsuit. I have 87 page
lawsuit still people
Wouldn't support me because they see the content that I put out is like no one in the world had done something like this
87 page report and I sued also the world bank for giving money to china and and different places. I sued
And and different places. I sued. Um, um obama for giving 150 billion dollars to the iranian regime
That wasn't given to the iranian people because it belonged to the iranian people. It was actually given
to
Um to the iranian regime that was used to start more conflicts
With more beefs, right? So why are you giving 150 billion dollars?
When the iranian citizens are being killed so china gave technology facial recognition and other things
That was used to hunt the iranian citizens to rape girls in iran
To even suicide them
That came from china. So my message too is so I really don't have any um emotion to iranian people
um, my family they're irani, but I consider myself an american and
Um, I I care about everybody the same but since I speak farsi, um, i'll just tell you guys something in english first
I truly believe that
You guys are in grave danger
If you allow your regime or your regime
Every looked the other way, but we need to cut off our ties with them and renounce
This is very very
Decouple completely
Completely but not but you need to completely denounce the communist regime and expose them
Because the the communist regime is a plague for humanity
And look at the play that's coming now, right? It is really a plague for the entire human race
So I think a lot of lives in iran are at stake. I don't just mean to the virus through conflicts. Okay, because
There's emotions iranian people sometimes can have emotions and get really angry fast. I don't care
I'll just do this and the government may do something like that. But think about it
And then the u.s. May may react and take out a lot of people
So and that's because of china because china's influence to people the chinese are super clever
I mean, you don't understand how clever they are
When you look at their face, I don't mean just chinese living in uh in the u.s
Or where they're grown up here. So we have something called abc american-born chinese. Okay in america. I don't mean that
But people who grew up in china
Under the communist regime you have
You have uh, the commodities are less you have 1.5 billion people the government forces everything and it's a jungle people fighting for things
You have to almost be a wolf
So they're so clever. They can look at you in the face
Nothing will change not even a a hair will move or an eyelash and they'll lie lie to you in a hundred different ways
And do a narrative and you'll believe it
And that's how and they can they can come and tell you truths and to deflect and social engineer an entire company
or university or an entire nation
By just utilizing japan people and their victims themselves because the chinese people are victims of the communist party
This teaching of Mao Zedong
brainwashed an entire civilization
That was rooted in ethics
Um and daoist and buddhist, um and christian and and confucius
Ethics forget about people who don't like religion. I just mean ethics
Okay, they had ethics set in place of telling the truth and not deceiving people not hurting others, but that's how they are. So
I don't mean massive chinese, but
Unfortunately, you know, I have 1500 phone numbers in my phone that are chinese and they're the good ones and
And they're really really they even tell me like I have to work on myself because i'm a professional liar
I just I grew up in china and I just one thing happens out of emotion. I'll just lie left on the right
So and iranians are extremely clever. I was just going to say that it sounds a lot like iranians
Yes, yes, I didn't want to insult the iranian people, but they're gonna have to too, right?
It's true. Well, it's
It's because of the socialist system, right?
The socialist system creates a system that allows it gets people to start fighting each other and becoming wolves
And you don't have enough stuff and people cheat and it becomes worse and worse. It becomes a jungle
in the u.s
it i'm not saying capitalism not wolves either right but
It's a better system of checks and balances if you look at our constitution our constitution came from the greeks
Previously came from a xenophon from cyrus the great
So this is the greatest works of all the people's brains at least the european and the middle eastern which are similar people
That came into one document
So that is a great thing and we should uh have our ai systems over that and and other things
Model after this that being said we have an issue a lot of phd people or empirical people
They're the ones uh being the ai regulators and their way of thinking is a narrow
They don't look at it in a science fiction way and even there's a part in their brain as soon as you say something
It's unbelievable
It completely shuts off and they attack you or they just don't see it and they don't agree
Then you have all these billionaires that are invested in the five years of some ai and they want to by engineer you
They want to do cybernetics
They invest all this money that will translate into trillions and trillions of dollars in the next five or ten years
So they're invested into it
Their outlook is well
They're not going to think about it could kill 10 million people or 100 million people
They're just thinking about oh my company my money blah blah blah. It's completely out of selfish emotion
I'm not stopping themselves to think so right now
This is a bad pandemic that we have
Um, it's really horrible
On the other hand, it's a great thing in some some regards
It gets people to sit down and talk to sit back and do a reset and stop
And think why are we here?
so
from a from a physical perspective, okay, it was
Us transferring all this technology and not caring being complicit in china and being um being this way
And then the logical perspective would be okay the geopolitics of everything that connects china iran the u.s
And the whole world and the trade and finances and the ai but there's a spiritual component
If you look at ancient civilizations, not only just the religious text, not only their civilization, but there's artifacts
Attesting to their civilization they go to a certain point they get destructed get destroyed and they always point back to
The technology got
More than the people's ethics or the people became really corrupt
So I have to become a better person. I have to become completely selfless
Um, and altruistic and i'm not i'm kind of in the middle. I've been trying to be selfless and be more rational and and try to
Try to see things in a more clear way
So I need to do this and if the whole world can do that and try to hurt others, but also repent if you've ever hurt anybody
If you've if you've hurt a girl you ruined her life by telling you love her and then you know
You guys you get what i'm saying
Um, if if you if you've coerced somebody into a real estate deal if you've uh, you know
Caused conflicts with other people that's huge. It was your fault that you were greedy if you've stolen
I should all look inside and to ourselves sincerely repent
And try to improve our consciousness and improve ourselves our souls our beings our character
Maybe by doing that but also exposing the communist party
maybe humanity has a good chance of
Of going to the next stage in a really positive way. So that's that's kind of my message not only for myself
For everyone else, um, you know, i'm an ai guy and a security guy
But I was able to do all these years of meditation
And tai chi and martial arts and I learned from other people. Okay, it doesn't really come from me
Most of it just from maybe from learning from other people, right? So i'm taking that knowledge
And I hope to share that with whoever wants me to have it on the show and I really thank you
Oh, absolutely. Is there any other questions you want to ask? I have three more questions for you
Two of them, uh the ending questions, but um, my approach to the podcast has always been i'm interested in anything that is interesting
and I I believe that
We have to hear everyone but listen to a very few people, uh, who make sense to us. So
You know, i'm not judging or reassessing or anything like that. What's interesting to me?
I hear it and I allow our audience to hear it in a very uncut unedited kind of a way
Uh, they can make their own mind what they want to believe in it
But you know, we can always learn from people and take something that we can use towards our own journey
That's that's uh, my philosophy. I'm interested in what we can learn from other people
That's that's uh, my philosophy. I'm interested to know
After laying the context in such a beautiful way with respect to china
What's at stake if united states end up electing biden or any other democrat in november?
um
Your freedoms will all be lost. Yeah, that's what I think too. Absolutely
surveillance states
and potentially
death through conflicts
Of a lot of people around the world now if people believe in some people believe in the end times
Okay, some people wanted to happen the iranian regime part of them wanted to happen and
Some people maybe is connected to the white house. They also want to bring their the rapture that they call it, right?
um
I think something like that
Could happen but not in the way they think let's say if there is going to be some type of savior
I think there's going to be a next stage. Uh, it's going to be a hope for humankind
And I don't if but if people want to actually create a conflict because they want to bring a savior
I think they're going to be in the wrong and and they're they're going to go end up in a bad place
I don't mean someone in the white house, right? That's not what I meant
But i'm saying people that try to go in into anywhere or iran, um, or china doesn't believe in that stuff
They just want to use
whatever so
um
If biden's elected, um, which he will not unless somebody cheats
Um, yes, it is the worst thing you could ever imagine. But here's the thing if president trump is elected
It'll be much better
But we need we need to support. Um, so his his hands are tied
He has a lot of power, but then he doesn't he's always like
counter and check in the white house because
The white house is connected to the big tech companies the drug farmer companies the cia the fbi
And different think tanks different universities and every person that has that wants to get something done
So if president trump has a certain model for the country that's based on the constitution
He can't pick everything that's positive at the moment because once he picks one piece
The other piece comes in and attacks the other piece
Uh, so he has to give away here and there so he doesn't get taken out himself
Think about it with the 4g system. They almost took him out mobilizing the entire media. So
They're putting on the 5g system and I know president trump has read my articles
He got my book and I know he's he knows what i'm saying now about the 5g and he's thinking differently now
And so is the ai department but still it's hard from the belief how people can be bi-digitally social programmed
And it's a very very deep
concept
That I turned
And also links with another term I brought up which is called the human bio digital network, which is very very sophisticated
It would take me hours to explain
so putting these together and then the geopolitics of everything and how people think and
The possibilities of so many bad things that could happen is numerous
So that's why I say the best thing we can do is improve our character
really become calm
and rational people
And not to do anything as extreme like lock everybody down lock everything down at one moment
Don't even deliver food anymore
Because sure it can prevent less disease with the correct conflicts and a hundred different other things because this virus is not going to kill every
single person
So you have to have a middle ground so in tai chi, you know, there's something like you pull and you push right?
I'm sorry, and then there's like yin and yang as a concept if you put or a bird if you put a bird in the cage
If you squeeze it too much, it's going to die
If you open the cage, it's going to go you have to be neutral to it. Right? So with this pandemic
What we need to do is be sort of like a checks and balances with it not go to the extreme
Excellent. Cyrus's book is called art. Well, one of your book is called artificial intelligence
Dangerous to humanity ai u.s china big tech facial recognition drones smartphones internet of things 5j robotics cybernetics and biodigital
social programming
Absolute pleasure having you on the show. What's next for you and where can our audience follow your future works?
You can follow me on twitter at syrus a parsa
one
Uh, you can go to my website and um download the book
Um, I recommend artificial intelligence dangers to humanity
And try to sink in the entire book. I have videos
I've got about 10 episodes out on the organization and one called a couple called the ai show you can watch those
and
If you can support me on twitter and reach out by email, you're welcome to
I really want to thank you for having me on your show having the courage to have me on your show and
Also, then yeah, you're a very smart gentleman to understand
You you've done a lot of things and you're very knowledgeable with our iran china ai tech everything
So it's it's it's puts a pleasure to sit down with somebody who knows everything
Well, thank you so much. I really appreciate it. Um, let me ask you the last question
I ask all my guests this should be interesting coming from your perspective
That if you come come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization, what would you say?
Is the worst thing humanity has done and what would you say is our greatest achievement?
Repeat the second half of the question
Well, let me say the whole question again if you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization
What would you say is the worst thing humanity has done? And what would you say is our greatest achievement?
Well, what would he say or what would I what would you say to the intelligent alien the worst and the best that humanity has achieved?
I would say
The best thing we've achieved is exposing you
And the worst thing we've achieved was uh, not realizing what you were doing for the past 100 years
That's great, how do you like that answer it's perfect
love it
Let me let me put something else in my in here because we're getting really metaphysical. Yeah, man
Do it. I wasn't expecting this. So so I did all these things maybe maybe it's having the expectation at all
That is one of our biggest enemy as well
So there is um, yes, there are trillions and trillions of universes and parallel universes
Cadrillions and quadrillions and quadrillions of planets and that's all at the level of molecules
And there's atomic realms and some and there's so many quantum realms
And there's you know in my book I talk about how in history it even the persians talk about ai
And you'd have to read this book. Okay, so but I don't I don't talk about aliens. I just talk about you know
There's just that right?
And this is what the samarians say and so on
In
In 2002 when I got back from china because 99 I went to china
The reason why I went there because I wanted to write a book which I which I wrote and finished
No, two was 800 pages. It's called better people better world the book to save and change a better world
It brought the issue of iran china the u.s. The tech
Society human trafficking sex trafficking broken marriages everything you could think of into one book
And I come to publish it
Nobody would publish it. Oh, you don't have a degree
Okay, who the hell are you writing this stuff? I give my bachelor's and master's and adjoining finish phd, but no two
Um, i'll just tell you the lower version of it. So it's hard to believe. Um, let's say it was just a lucid dream and not a vision
Okay, but I saw some time in the future that
Somebody became president. I didn't know who it was. It was a white guy
he was
About six three six four blue eyes and blonde hair
And then something happened and the whole world like was becoming into chaos
and i've said this in my other interviews some other ones that are kind of metaphysical and
Then something happens and everyone's against each other white is white black against black and i'm like, this is 2002
I was like, why would whites be against whites and black against blacks?
Because back then, you know, there's still a bit of a racial divide. I didn't get it because the vision wasn't clear
I was sitting and I couldn't see everything perfectly
Then I saw the next step but something happened iran. It was on cnn. It was a nuclear thing
Then something else happened and 6.2 billion people died
so
And one of the main reasons this was a dream or like a vision
I was sitting down. Let's say okay, that's all I say so so
But I couldn't see who what I just knew was I didn't know it was trump
But when he went up the elevator, i'm like, that's the guy in my dream
And that's why I ran up and created these companies right away
And and I created they are and that's why I invented the
companies. I'm like, what if
that dream
is correct
So mess all these companies and then i'm telling people around me. He's going to become president. You're nuts even the christians
He'll become president. You're nuts. Thank you became president. So then then I get to uh, well, I think this is going to happen with china
No one's going to freaking believe me. So i'm like, okay. I have good research investing abilities
Why don't I just try to bring a narrative in that everyone's in danger by by investing in this company?
And then writing these books and giving these reports to
former cia and secret service and different things
And uh, I did that and everything I found matched the dream almost in identical way
But I I just thought what if the dream is dream is correct?
And I don't really follow dreams, but i'm like, why did I see that in 2002?
Right, so then I then I find all these studies. I'm like the world's in danger and I was like, okay
The world's in danger and I was right. So
Are that many people going to die? Uh, probably not. Are we going to be here next 20 years? 100 we're going to be here
Are a lot of people in danger through conflicts potentially? Yeah, there is a concept of destiny and there's a concept of free will
They're both intertwined
People have free wills, but there is a destiny that's kind of faith
But then you look at maybe science there's a pattern of things, right?
So you do things that has a cause and effect and a chain reaction
so
If we have things that are happening at the moment and it happened last year and it's gonna happen next year through trump
through china and iran
and all the little
Little chess pieces
This chain of reaction can cause a huge global
Like conflict that can kill a lot of people in addition to russia. That's why I say everybody stop
a point at china
Expose them and the regime will just fall and it'll be a lot safer
And I think but most important thing we need to be rational and just think of what I said is just a just a story
Okay, I don't want to scare anybody but uh, it's just a story and but
look at the data I put in this book and look at what's happening now that I was right and then look at other people that
were right and let's expose them and improve ourselves and use this time in the pandemic to
um
To raise our our awakening that that's my opinion for myself and whoever agrees with me. So that's the last thing I have to say
Maybe this is a very strange interview for you. Excellent. Loved it. Loved it
You
