Did anybody hold your hand coming into this world?
I'm talking about through the womb.
Yeah, you got into the world and some doctor slapped you.
You started breathing.
And at some point you became a person.
OK, yes.
But no, you were alone on this whole
journey and you're going to be alone when you leave.
Hello and welcome to the 62nd episode of Neohuman podcast.
I'm the Mugabahari etygologist on Twitter and Instagram.
And you can follow this show on LiveInLimbo.com, iTunes, YouTube and Bitshoot.
And with me, I have the pleasure of having the one and only John McAfee.
Welcome to Neohuman podcast, John.
Hey, well, thanks for having me on.
Absolutely. Absolute pleasure.
Why don't we start with you?
I'm going to be I'm going to be doing tequila shooters.
Oh, fantastic.
With wine chasers while we're doing this, if you don't mind.
I don't mind no disrespect whatsoever.
No, but it is taken.
It's late evening for me.
I'm in a part of the world where it's it's late and a man, especially a man of 74,
should be relaxing with wine and tequila.
So I'm doing that while we're talking.
Fantastic.
Fantastic.
So which part of the world are you located now?
If I could tell you, I would.
OK, fair enough.
OK, it's interesting.
Nobody or even our closest family has no clue where we are.
OK, right.
Not our children, Janice's brothers and sisters, nobody knows where we are.
Is this due to the problems with the government?
And I'm saying it because of the tweet that I saw you sending today,
which I want to mention for our audience because it gives a very good context about
where you stand perspective wise and worldview wise with respect to government
that you have said, I am at war with my government.
It was intended to represent this great
nation of profound beauty, bordered by two vast and different oceans,
a nation which nourished and nurtured me.
Instead, it is a parasite on the very
precious thing that it was intended to watch over.
Yeah, well, no, there's no no secret.
I've been at war with the U.S. government
and moving on the run from the U.S.
government since January of 2019 when the IRS convened a grand jury
to charge Janice and I with tax fraud.
Now, it's also no secret I have not paid taxes for 10 years.
I refuse. I will not ever pay taxes again.
Taxation is theft.
We didn't have it prior to 1913 in America.
And America was at that time the industrial giant of the world with no taxes.
People go, how do we fund the government?
Do some research, people.
Taxation has merely made us go from an
industrial giant to a country that manufactures nothing anymore
other than war machines.
What's going to happen when someone kicks our ass once and someone will?
So we have got to straighten up and taxation is theft and it's killing us.
So I don't pay it. Now, for eight years, they left me alone.
Well, I've already paid 50 million dollars, over 50 million dollars in taxes in my life.
I promise you, people, I have not received 50 million dollars in services.
So I'm not paying anymore.
Now, two years ago, I started speaking on the national stage about you don't want
to pay taxes either, use privacy coins like Monero and distributed
exchanges, and no one will ever know what your income or expenses are.
Now, I live in a community of tens of thousands of people around the world.
Many of them crypto leaders like Brock Pearson do not use cash.
We don't use fiat currency.
When I take a job, if you can't pay me in crypto, then I'm not working for you.
And if I want to buy something and you won't sell it to me in crypto, then I don't
need it because there's nothing you can't buy.
Houses, cars, clothes, bulletproof vest, shoes, food.
When we went silent, OK, so Janice and I, back to the story,
we were chased all across the Caribbean.
Finally, we got arrested in the Dominican Republic, who insisted we had to go back
to America. This is after Belize?
This is seven months ago, my friend.
Yes.
Yeah, no, we were in jail in the Dominican Republic for four days.
Finally, I got legal representation
and because we were arrested illegally, everybody knew this, but it didn't really
matter to them because they're just going to ship me back to the States and it'll all
be forgotten. No, I'm not letting it be forgotten.
I got my lawyers to file a brief with the
Supreme Court in the Dominican Republic demanding I simply get a hearing.
Now, they have to do that.
They have to.
As soon as the paper was filed, we got out of jail and went to the VIP.
They took us to the VIP lounge in the Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic.
And we were served by people with white
gloves, champagne and caviar, along with heads of state who happened to be visiting.
Now, that shift simply because I refused to roll fucking over.
And so I did.
Now, that was in July.
So now they so we went to the Bahamas first as we took a boat to the Bahamas.
The Bahamian government tried to arrest us.
We found out about it in advance and left
and went to Cuba. We were there for a month and a half.
And the Cuban government called Janice and I in and said,
the United States government has demanded that we either we turn you to America.
Or expel you from our country.
And we know you're a friend of Cuba.
We're not going to return you to America.
We know what would happen to you,
but we do have to ask you to leave our country within 72 hours, which we did
four days at sea, sailed into the Dominican Republic and were arrested before we even
got into port and said, you have to go back to America.
So on the airplane to London, this is after we got out of jail.
I said, honey, we can't keep this up.
We can't run forever.
We have to go into hiding.
So we did in London.
We got there on a weekend.
So I knew had it been a weekday, I would have gotten arrested.
I know this, but it was a weekend.
So the paperwork of the U.S. State Department has to file with the London,
with the UK State Department, they have to get a court order.
It takes days.
So I knew we're safe.
We spent one night in London, went underground and no one knows where we are now.
Wow.
And yet you are still running for president of the United States in 2020.
Sure. Why not?
So what what are the biggest obstacles you consider in front of this great country?
Otherwise great country United States that you would want to tackle?
I know that you are very driven by disruption to the entire system.
And that's very well understood considering your position.
But what other obstacles or shortcomings or main obstacles and shortcomings do you
consider coming from the government that you want to disrupt or change fundamentally?
Well, there's only one and we have to change it or we're all dead.
And that is we have to wake up to the fact that it doesn't matter who the president
is, that our two party system is a charade designed to keep us focused.
And how do you get people focused and and agitated?
Well, you you you create sides or two sides.
There's the left and there's the right.
There's the right. There's the wrong.
There's the liberal and there's the
conservatives and the gun owners and the gun haters. There are the social
progressives and the conservative take care of yourselves.
Well, there's plenty of shit there to create a tension between two groups of
people, pretty much evenly divided, right?
And that was perfect.
Whoever played that out and made that happen.
Brilliant. And we know who they were. It's the CIA.
The CIA controls America, people.
If you think otherwise, then
you're not thinking.
I mean, who controls the information flow?
And and who?
Because, first of all, the CIA calls presidents transients,
transients, and they're there for four years, eight, Max and they're gone.
And we have to train another new one.
They don't bother training anymore.
They just control them through information flow.
Let me give you an example of second Gulf War.
The CIA king, I don't know what they call
themselves, probably not emperor of Middle East, whoever that may have been,
decided that he wanted Iraq removed as a power.
Apparently they weren't playing according to the plan.
And so he called Washington and said, I want them bombed into oblivion.
I want it done tomorrow.
Are we clear? It's fucking with my plans.
So Washington, their job is to make sure all of their kings and emperors and
princes around the world are productive and doing what they want.
It says, OK, all right, attend, Larry.
We have to bomb Iraq tomorrow.
You know, the president make it happen.
And you get the team, the Congress team together and let them know what's
happening and the guys go, OK, do we have free rein?
Yes. Do what you have to do.
They walked into the president's office and said, Mr. President,
I regret to tell you, please, Mr. President, sit down.
There is a matter of the gravest,
both national and international urgency that we must make you aware of.
Iraq has nuclear weapons
and missile capabilities, double people,
pardon, WMDs, right, nuclear weapons and
missile capabilities capable of delivering them to our closest ally, England.
And, sir, we have news that perhaps as soon as tomorrow
that there might be a nuclear blast over London.
Now, sir, it's not our job to advise you.
No, no, we are simply here to inform you about the facts of life.
And I'm sorry.
Now, what choice did Bush have?
None. And he said, sir, again,
if something is not done to stop them by tomorrow, it will be too late.
Four hours later, our stealth bombers
eradicated the Iraqi military and the leveled bunch of Baghdad.
And in the next few months, bomb them into the Stone Age, like the CIA prince
or whoever he's called of the Middle East wanted.
This is how it works, people.
And you only have to lie.
You can tell the truth.
And by the way, we all knew there were no nuclear weapons in Iraq.
The American people knew.
Certainly everybody in Europe knew and all the Middle East knew.
Who didn't know the president and Congress
because they were briefed by the people who knew the CIA.
So this is how it works.
The president's got no power.
It doesn't matter if Trump or Hillary Clinton or a derelict from the street
or your pet dog is elected president, nothing will change in this country.
And if if you don't want to accept these words,
I mean, if you're over 21 and have lived through more than one election,
you will have noticed one thing, nothing in your life changed.
No more or less beer in the refrigerator.
Your wife is still with you, still got your job.
Nothing changes in your life when we change presidents.
Can't you see those people?
And so my job is not to be elected because I don't want the job.
No one should want that job if it has any sense.
And yet presidents don't even know they're being manipulated.
No, my job is to try to wake people up to the fact that those in power,
both the puppets and the puppet masters, are standing on your shoulders.
It is the fruits of your labor, your creativity, your work,
the sweat of your brow that supports the consumption of this corrupt government.
So all you got to do, people, is shrug.
Step across the line into a world where we don't use money anymore.
Good God, people, that's an unnecessary thing in cryptocurrency.
If you can't pay me in crypto, specifically Monero, then I'm not working for you.
And if I can't buy something in crypto, then I don't need it
because you can buy everything, cars, clothes.
When it went to London, when we were deported,
we went to a crypto-only hotel, beautiful, big-ass hotel in London, right?
Food, the service, the room, the cleaning, the phone calls, all with crypto.
Yeah, I want to talk about crypto.
But before that, what you mentioned about the process leading to the Iraq War,
it reminded me of the process that basically banks forced the president
and the U.S. government to bail them out after the 2009 crash.
Hank Paulson and Bernanke go into the president's office and demanding the bailout,
saying that if we don't get this amount of money, the entire economy of the world
is going to collapse within a day.
Well, yeah, keep in mind,
presidents don't just have one puppet master.
They got a thousand strings that control them.
The Fed is one of those.
So the Secret Service is one of those.
The military covert intelligence is one.
The CIA is the big one.
No, presidents have thousands of strings.
The Fed is one of those.
And that was Fed going, OK,
bail these bastards out.
It's not my interest for this to be happening.
Are there strings ultimately coming from a unified kind of a big picture or no?
They're just I wish I wish it was.
Wouldn't that be an easy solution?
This is going to remove that motherfucker forever.
No, it's not.
It is a totalitarian
distributed system.
Not decentralized, but deceptive.
And so who the fuck knows who's at top?
It varies.
CIA is always number one or number two because they are the global
intelligence agency of the world.
And scary people, and they're the ones that be chasing me.
And also, they were my biggest client for years.
And I have good friends within the CIA,
but even within the CIA, it's not a unified organism.
It's broken into factions.
I mean, the CIA is arranging with Paul
Rowe of the Bahamas to get me arrested so I can be deported back to the state.
And another branch of the CIA is calling me to tell me about it,
which is how we got out of the country just before they came.
And unfortunately, they didn't tell me about the Dominican Republic.
We ended up in jail there.
So this has been our life.
We've been on the run for seven and a half years, seven and a half, maybe.
Yes, seven and a half years.
And during that time, we had been chased,
shot at, chased at one hundred and twenty miles an hour on back roads of Arizona.
People dressed in fake police uniforms storming our apartment complex in Portland,
Oregon in 2013, September 2013.
This has been our life.
This is how we live, people. Why?
Because I refuse to shut up.
Which is which is exactly what most people don't do, even with your situation
and others like you, like with the Sanj, for example,
a lot of people without knowing much about what is going on, they're like, well,
they must have done something wrong for being chased by the government because
they just don't want to be involved in any of it.
You know, it's just insane.
I mean, that's what that sheep think, right, right, which is fine.
But they vote.
Yeah, OK.
But fortunately, it doesn't matter who they elect, right?
Because most of the sheep don't know what's happening.
So but at some point,
the sheep have to be woken up if you're going to move camp, for example,
or get them out of the of harm's way from hungry wolves.
And when sheep get unsettled, well,
crazy things happen, they panic, they start running in strange directions.
The shepherds
are at their wits end trying to figure out how we're going to get these motherfuckers
back into a safe place.
So that's what the CIA doesn't want.
That's why the CIA refuses to allow change.
They don't want a president, but they let Obama go ahead, build Obamacare.
They didn't give a shit.
We'll tear it down to the next administration.
And they did. It's gone.
Four years of that man's life and trillions of our dollars down the tubes.
Trump wanted a wall between Mexico
and the United States.
That was almost four years ago.
How much was built?
Ninety three miles.
Ninety two of those miles merely repaired the existing wall.
Nothing changes.
We understand people.
So stop worrying about that.
Why do you care about things that don't matter?
Who cares if a Republican or a Democrat?
The problem is, is that you identify with a group.
You are either a Democrat or a Republican.
You either love guns or you hate guns.
Well, who gives a shit?
Does that mean you must align yourself with others who also think like you?
God, what a horror of a world it would be if that was what everybody did.
We would have violence in the streets.
We would shoot each other from our automobiles, which we do sometimes.
In a lot of parts of the world, that's exactly what's happening.
This tribalism.
Yes, but that's that's a regression of human society, culture and spirit.
You don't.
Stop identifying with groups.
Stop wanting to belong.
Stop wanting others to validate your feelings, thoughts, perceptions and beliefs.
Because if they need validating, they are not valid.
Be yourself.
Stand alone for one thing, the truth of your life as you see it,
because there is no group that you will fit into.
Nobody can fit into a group.
We are unique individual spirits.
Genetically fingerprint,
voice print in every fucking way, different from everybody else.
And yet you want to goddamn belong, belong to the YMCA or swim.
Don't belong to some some
collective cult, because that's what the political parties are.
They're cults, cults that says, yes, this is the truth.
Guns are bad.
Take them away from people or the other side.
No, this is the truth.
You have to defend yourself in life.
There is no magic button you get to push.
If someone broke into your house and is
holding a gun to your head and are raping your wife and you want it to stop,
press that magic button that makes the police appear between you and them.
It doesn't exist.
It's a fallacy, a dream.
Police aren't here to protect you.
What do they ever protect?
No, they're here to clean up the mess after the crime has been done.
So, I don't know, both sides got valid points.
But why don't you choose for you?
Not based on fear or what your parents did or what they taught you at school or
what's right, because nobody knows what's right in this chaos.
So the problem is the belonging to political
parties in our political system that's causing the fucking chaos.
I totally agree.
And it's really interesting to me how this
concept of delusion of objective reality keep coming up in this kind of a
conversation, whether on this podcast or outside of it, that there is no such a
thing as objective reality, there is no such a thing as objective truth or ethics
and morality, just you on your own are responsible to find your own way.
That's that's it, because you were
did anybody hold your hand coming into this world?
I'm talking about through the womb.
Yeah, you got into the world and some
doctors slapped you, started breathing, and at some point you became a person.
OK, yes.
But no, you were alone on this whole
journey and you're going to be alone when you leave.
Listen, I'm 74.
The doorway that I must exit from is, I'm sure, visible to be in some direction
if I look hard enough so I know when I leave here, no one's leaving with me.
Yeah, it's just some labels that they put on you.
Like I was born in Iran and I was one second old and automatically I was
labeled as a Shia Muslim straight male Iranian.
And good luck changing any of those.
Some of them are punishable by death.
Some of them you'll be alienated from your community and family.
So I'm not saying that it's the worst in Iran or those countries.
It's just the labels that I call them
involuntary baggage that is being placed upon our shoulders.
And we're forced to carry them for the rest of our lives.
Well, I mean, listen, there's also benefits to those labels.
I mean, for example, Shiite,
one of the advantages to being a Shiite is your call to prayer is fucking beautiful.
Compared to the rest of the Muslim world.
And I know if you've heard it, no, you have.
Yes.
I mean, if there is a is there a song of greater longing,
of greater need, of of greater depth than some of these calls to prayer sung out?
Yeah, the problem is for a lot of people
who grew up in those societies because that call and a lot of beautiful things
about that culture, you know, like I love mosque architecture or what you're
saying, some certain music that are coming, call of prayer.
But it took me many, many years and many
psychedelic experiences to be able to split ideology away from the artistic value
and just appreciation of the concept, because if you grow up there,
you're being persecuted on so many different levels.
Every aspect of that society has become hated by you.
Well, I have to differ, by the way, on the Muslim architecture and art.
I think Muslim art stems from a negativity about what art can be.
I mean, the shirt that you're wearing,
that's representational of leaves to me.
That's that's that's against the Muslim law.
Is it not? Yes.
You cannot have representational art.
Absolutely. Pictures of people, no pictures of scenes.
No, no, it's got to be art that's purely abstract.
That's good. But one of the things I miss is the art in the Muslim world is,
I don't know, seeing the human form, for example, painted by people like Picasso.
Well, I mean, it's to me.
There's the difference in art.
However, in music, good God, man, the Shia call to prayer.
Good Lord, that is
heartrending and beautiful.
Have you heard any any of the mornings
of Shias, because I'm writing a book about my life and my life was changed
completely for two, three years because of, you know, one dude with a microphone
and a little bit of reverb singing those morning melodies.
You know, it resonates with you so much that you are carried away with it.
And I listen, I'm so ignorant of Muslim culture.
I have to admit it that I know very little.
I know the things that I like, that I've heard and seen, which is more I haven't.
I'd love to hear it, though.
And if after this, if you would send Janice a link to one of these,
I promise you, I will listen to it and I think this is a good opportunity to say
thanks to Janice for scheduling this interview as well.
Janice, another thanks for scheduling this interview.
OK, absolutely.
She's the workhorse here.
And without her, nothing would ever get done.
That's awesome. She's been very kind and consistent and responding.
And she is she's very good at responding and she's on the ball.
I noticed last night I was looking at some of your information.
You were born pretty much like two weeks after the end of World War Two.
You were born in England, am I right?
Yes, absolutely.
How has the world changed from the perspective of you since
right after World War Two to now?
Because a lot of people are saying that we are moving beyond the order that was
established after World War Two and things are being disrupted and being changed.
I just want to experience this life
that you've had from the perspective of the world that you've experienced.
Well,
there have been two changes,
both of them interlinked, number one in politics
and government. I grew up
in 1950, I was five years old,
1960,
when Dwight Eisenhower left office, I was 15.
So
my teen years were spent in 1950s America, where
the land of opportunity,
the land of
possibility,
the land where anyone can become anything if you're willing to bear
the burden of who you are with all of the negatives and positives of that,
whether you're smart or dumb, black or white.
And I admit back then blacks and anything
other than whites were disadvantaged, that didn't stop
many black people from taking advantage of the land of opportunity,
given the realities of who you are.
So
it was like
growing up with something I wanted, it was it was so beautiful.
Now, at the same time, it's kind of plastic.
Women had their place in the kitchen.
Men had their place in the workforce.
If you went to a doctor, they all smoked cigarettes while you were there.
And if if you were hyper-tensive or something, they said,
you need to smoke more.
Cigarettes, try unfiltered camels.
You get far more naked.
I am serious.
Doctors prescribed cigarettes.
People were also smoking on planes, right?
Oh, yes.
And you smoked everywhere, airplanes, everywhere except church.
All right.
And that was, you know, that's because you're in church.
You should not be distracted by anything that distracts you from God.
But other than church,
she's smoking fucking courthouses, courtrooms, courtrooms, had ashtrays,
judges smoked.
It was like
it was that did have that aspect.
And people go, that's kind of crazy.
Well, yeah, but that's just what people believe back then.
Different world, a different world.
But in 1960, that all changed.
When Eisenhower left office, you could feel something strange.
The adults were unsettled.
The teachers at school were unsettled.
I mean, Eisenhower's exit speech was horrifying.
I mean, one of the great U.S.
presidents and one of the greatest generals of the past five centuries,
the supreme allied commander during World War II.
I mean, the man had balls of steel and a mind as sharp as a tack.
And when he left, he said,
if you do not beware, the CIA will take from America
every freedom that we were birthed with.
And that's exactly what happened.
We were not beware.
The next president,
John F.
Kennedy,
made it his goal after he'd been in office for a while,
he realized that Jesus God, the CIA is ruling everything.
Said, I'm going to dismantle the CIA
and take its pieces and hand them out to other covert agencies.
One month later, he was accidentally shot in the head in Dallas, Texas.
His brother, Robert Kennedy, at the next election ran for president
under the banner, and he said, my main campaign promise is that if elected,
I will dismantle the CIA.
One month later, he was shot in the head.
Wow.
No president has ever challenged them since.
So it doesn't matter who the president is before.
You have to wake up to the fact that our
government has been co-opted by covert agencies. Why?
Because it has become clear that information is the only true power in this world.
I mean, you think bombs and
battleships and stealth bombers are the power.
No, they operate on information.
The handlers operate them based on information given to them.
And who owns the information?
You might think it's Google, Facebook, Twitter.
No, the CIA owns the real information.
Yeah, I was going to ask you, how do you see this balance or relationship
between CIA and big tech companies considering how we are digitizing more
and more aspects of our lives and data represents the smallest faction
of information that we are gathering and analyzing and making sense out of?
Well,
there's two levels of information.
There's the.
The babble.
Of a world full of people who are babbling,
and Google owns that. How does they get it?
They have spiders, they have these bots that just float around all over the world.
Oh, there's a new website. See what's there.
Look at all the pages, gather it together now.
That's called the surface web.
There are three webs. There's the surface web, what Google can see,
which is all websites, OK, new stories, which we gather from websites,
electronic data, trivial shit, which, while it may help us understand
how Thomas Edison invented the light bulb, which he didn't,
it's not going to help us very much in finding out what's in the mind
of Iranian generals who might be planning an attack on U.S. soil.
Google is not going to, neither is Facebook, neither is Twitter.
So this is the realm of what's called the deep web.
Now, deep web can be indexed for a bunch of reasons.
Number one, it's either electronically organized,
but you can't get into it without being a member.
Like if you're a psychiatrist and you can prove you're a psychiatrist,
you can get into psych.com. If you're not, you can't.
Google cannot be everything and therefore cannot see what's happening there.
That's part of the deep web.
The other part is the non-electronic deep web.
I'm still calling it the web.
That information is gleaned by people who kidnap
lieutenants from Iran and take them to Guantanamo and torture them.
And so they think, pardon?
Old school, you're right.
Yeah, but that information,
the value of that information, if you can validate it,
we all know that under torture, people will tell you anything.
But a good operative might be able to get some truth.
That information is of extreme values,
the diamonds of information compared to what Google has,
which is the sandbox of information.
So those are our three levels,
the surface, which Google has, the deep web and electronic,
which people have been trying to index for years and can't because you can't be
a member of every secret product thing in the world.
And then the old school information.
I followed him to this address.
He went in, changed clothes, came out in the disguise and went north.
That information, that's the old school stuff.
Or we tortured him for nine weeks and we kind of think this might be the truth,
that information.
The CIA controls all three.
Google, you think the CIA does not have its thumbs in Google?
Of course it does.
It has its thumbs in any and every corporation that might be of value to it.
The deep web, I promise you, if there is a private website,
there is a CIA agent who has joined it with full credentials,
even if it had to be made up.
And the rest, the old school,
only the CIA has that information and that is the information which is used to
control presidents, congressmen and those who allegedly are in power.
But they're not.
We're living in an information age.
And if you're talking about international
relations, which is the stage upon which we float and survive,
then the only people who can advise you at the CIA
want to know what someone's thinking, the CIA will tell you.
Problem is, they're going to tell you the truth that they want to tell you.
And sometimes it's a lie, just like second Gulf War, Iraq has nuclear weapons.
They're about to bomb England.
Oh, really?
Well, OK, I need to do something.
So this is it.
But even they require us, the people, to support them in what they're doing.
Now, I'm not saying these are evil people.
No, in some respects, I understand
why they're doing what they're doing, because presidents are transients.
Do you think we elect a president who's
the smartest, who knows the most about the Middle East, China,
North Korea, the subtleties of Vietnam and its neighbor Cambodia,
what's happening with the Dalai Lama in Tibet?
Fuck no.
So you have to rely on advisors.
Who are your advisors?
The people who know who the CIA, the only ones who know.
This is our tragedy.
So they look at these idiots and they are
every one idiot in terms of the CIA agent who spent 50 years of his life
studying the nuances of the Muslim religion,
the political alliances stretching back into antiquity, the culture,
the system of marriage and love and managing the emotional chaos of the human being.
No, they know nothing of this shit,
not just in the Middle East, but in China, Nepal, in the Philippines, Venezuela.
And so these idiots come in and they run the country.
No, the CIA is not going to let that happen.
Fuck no.
We've got a plan that's been in place for 50 years.
You are not fucking up that plan.
Here's what you are allowed to do.
Now, they don't tell this to the president.
Of course not.
Mr. President, you're a boss here.
But no,
no, you're not.
You are a puppet and you will do what we say.
You just don't know it yet.
Would you say presidents are aware of this?
No, they're not aware of it.
They have no clue if they were nobody.
I mean, no, of course not.
Do you think Bush was aware he would be manipulated by the CIA
when they said the rocks got nuclear weapons?
Bomb them? No.
But was he aware at the end of his eight years?
No, no, no.
Listen, the CIA is too good, too fucking good.
No president knows this.
I know this because
the CIA was my first and largest customer and was remained my customer for years.
I have good friends within it.
Thank God it is as splintered as any other organization and bureaucracy.
I mean, one part of the CIA was trying to collect me in the Bahamas and another part
called me and said, they're coming for you at midnight tonight.
Sure as hell, we left just before they came.
They showed up, we were gone.
Hmm.
John, you're a cybersecurity legend.
How well this country or individuals are taking care of their cybersecurity in this
day and age? We have known people.
We haven't had any for 10 years.
People buy antivirus software.
It's useless.
It's useless.
The world has changed.
Nobody uses technology anymore.
Social engineering is how things are hacked.
Why? Why should I go to the trouble of writing sophisticated software to break
into your system when I can have a very clever neuro-linguistic programmer type
to sit out in the car and watch people come and go with badges and figure out who
is the secretary of the CEO who has everyone's passport, of course.
Is she married? Is she not?
Doesn't matter because even married, if the right person comes along,
you will slip and perhaps make a mistake that you may regret later.
But once you've slipped, you've slipped.
And that bastard you slipped for over the next few months is going to find out
everything about you pretty soon.
He's got everybody's passwords.
She doesn't even know it because the first thing he does is plant software on her
phone while she's sleeping after he has loved her into some ambulance.
He's got access to your phone.
Your phone is tapped.
Everyone is listening and watching pretty soon.
We're in.
Why bother spending two years writing sophisticated software when I can
fuck a secretary?
And this is happening in United States and in China and in Japan and in Europe and
all over the place, wherever there are men and women.
This is the oldest trick and game in the world by friend, you know,
boy meets girl.
The problem is,
do we always know where the girl came from?
Is she being paid to be with you?
And people in my position, I have to think of that, right?
So amazing.
That's one more question, my friend.
OK, let me ask you the last question that I ask all my guests then,
that if you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization,
what would you say is the worst thing humanity has done?
And what would you say is their greatest achievement?
I'm telling this to the alien.
Sure.
As a representative of the human race.
I don't think I'd tell a jack shit,
because if you can't trust your own species, how the hell can you trust an alien?
I mean, I'm being honest with you now.
The best thing you can ever do is tell nobody anything, right?
You don't know who they are.
No, basically, I would fill his mind with disinformation.
I would go, we are a peaceful race.
We are unarmed.
We have no weapons of any kind.
We eat fruit.
We don't kill animals and only fruit has fallen off the trees.
We live in utter peace.
No one has ever struck another human being or harmed them in any
unbecoming shit like that.
Meanwhile, thinking, how do I get my data back home about what I'm trying to find
out about this mobile? The world is a dangerous place.
I would anticipate that the universe outside our earth is equally as dangerous.
And I would look upon that alien with the utmost distrust.
Now, if it were human like and female and had a really beautiful ass,
I might also explain that the way that we show our peace is by something we call
making love. And if you'll please get up to rest, I will show you how we do that.
But beyond that,
that would be open to mention best, all right?
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, John. It was a pleasure.
