The way I put this is at Vanity Trump's privacy.
Hello, and welcome to the 11th episode of Neohuman Podcast.
I'm Agha Bahari, at Agologist on Twitter and Instagram, and you can follow the show on
liveonlimbo.com, iTunes, and soon on YouTube.
With me today is Kevin Kelly. Kevin is a founding executive editor of Wired Magazine and a former
editor publisher of the Whole Earth Review. Welcome to Neohuman Podcast, Kevin.
It's my pleasure to be here.
Let's start with a little bit of your background, the works you've done, and what you're working
on now these days.
It's a long story. I'm a pretty old guy. Let me just start from the current. I just finished
a book called The Inevitable, which is about the next 20 to 30 years, primarily in the
digital technology space. I kind of outline what I think are going to be the inevitable
changes, such as things as artificial intelligence and virtual reality, which are coming whether
we want them or not.
My take on these is that we should embrace these fully as a way to steer them and manage
them. We can't prohibit them. We can't stop them. We can only put our arms around, immerse
ourselves fully in them, and with use, try and steer them.
What inspired you to write this book now? I was actually going to ask you about the book,
but what tools do you use to see into the future, and what are the 12 technological forces
that you think will shape our future? Let's begin with why you saw the necessity to write
this book now at this time.
The origins of the book, truthfully, started on my blog, where I began writing what seemed
to me to be very obvious things that I think were difficult for other people to see, and
an example would be the fact that the Internet is the world's largest copy machine. Anything
that touches the Internet is going to be copied, no matter what it is. If it can be copied,
it will be copied when it touches it, and yet people were trying to stop the copying,
and so my understanding, my realization was that you can't stop the copying. Copying is
just an inherent, inevitable part of the Internet, and anyone who's trying to prohibit copying
or outlaw it or prevent it with copy protection stuff is just working against the grain, and
what you want to do is you want to work with the grain. You want to work with the fact
that the copies are going to be promiscuous, and they're going to be ubiquitous, and you
have to kind of understand that, and you have to embrace the idea that the copies are ubiquitous.
It also means that they become worthless, too, and so you have to therefore have an
economy, your own business, based on some things that can't be copied, and those become
the valuable. That's the kind of insight that I was writing about on my blog, and there
are others, and I just felt that it would really be beneficial for people to kind of
understand this, that we would, as a society as a whole, benefit from accepting these technologies,
and even, individually, if you were in business, you would also benefit. The origins of the
book was trying to convey some basic notions of how technology works like that.
Mm-hmm. What are the 12 technological forces, in your opinion?
Yeah. In the book, I kind of gather these forces and give them a verb. They're actually
technically a gerund. They're a constant motion. It ends ING, so there's screening, filtering,
accessing, cognifying, things like that. I don't think we have time in this podcast
to go through all 12 of them, and they're kind of larger umbrellas for other, they're
not just 12 trends. There's 12 categories that I put these trends into, and they're
somewhat arbitrary in the sense that they're a convenient way to organize things, but they're
not really distinct trends. In fact, there's a great interdependency of them. Sharing is
one of them. To share and to interact, interacting is another. Each of those encourage and empower
the other. There's a deep interdependence of these forces, and so they're not even really
that distinct. The things I cover, though, I cover artificial
intelligence, and I cover what's coming in, the increase in interaction and interacting
in virtual reality, and I cover tracking, which is the quantified self and the surveillance
that we're going to be enduring. I would say the same thing about tracking, as I would
say it by copying, which is that the Internet wants to track stuff. If you're touching the
Internet, you're going to be tracked. If you're going into VR, we'll be tracked to an extent
that has not been possible before. Everything that you do in VR will be tracked.
We can't stop tracking. People who are thinking that we're going to make laws or whatever
to stop tracking are wrong. We're going to have more tracking. The thing to do is to
work with tracking and to make the tracking work for us, make it civil, make it domesticated,
make it symmetrical. There's many things that we have to do, but we're not going to stop
the fact that 50 years from now, 30 years, whatever, most of our lives are going to be
tracked in some capacity. How do we make that livable? How do we make that work? How do
we steer that? How do we make that kind of tracking? It's going to be tracked, but what
kind of tracking is not inevitable? That's the kinds of things that I cover.
Excellent. You mentioned to adapt the change and change with it in a way. What comes to
mind is that general public has always made the argument for privacy, that all these technologies
are intruding our privacy, and that government is making an argument. We saw a very good
example with Apple versus FBI case, the argument for security. How do you think these two will
come maybe to some sort of a mutual understanding with the tech side of things and grow with
it in the upcoming future? I don't think they come to a common understanding. I think this
tension will be with us forever. One of the important things to understand is that there's
a really, there's a big linkage between two dimensions. The one dimension is this sort
of, we may call it the privacy. On one end of this dimension on this axis is privacy.
On the other one would be transparency. In one sense, you are sharing information about
yourself and that would be transparent. The other one is you share nothing. At the extreme
end, you are the Unabomber, Ted Konzinski, living in a shack somewhere off the grid.
You have no friends. You communicate with nobody. You're a loner. You're a hermit. Nobody
knows anything about you. At the other end, you have somebody who is living in everything
about them is their sharing, their thoughts, their oversharing, whatever it is. That's
one dimension. But there's another axis that's actually linked to that. That linkage is personalization.
At one end, you, at the extreme end, everything about you is personalized. Everything, you
get customized, everything. Your clothes are customized. Your food is customized. Your
medical attention is all personalized just to you. At the other end of that axis is generic.
Nothing is personalized. You just get, you're just a number. You're treated just like an
average person. Everything is, average is generic. Here, the thing is, the thing is,
those two axis, the transparency and the personalization are linked so that the only way that you can
get something personalized is that you have to reveal something about yourself. I want
my friends to treat me as individual, and therefore, I have to open up and reveal myself
to my friends. The only way that a company can give you some kind of personalized service
is if they know something about you. Those two things are linked so that if we want to
have maximum personalization, we have to have maximum transparency. If we don't want any
kind of transparency, then the price is going to be, you can be treated as generic number,
not as an individual. The surprise has, and so there's a little slider that you can go
back and forth. I think we should have that choice. Here's the thing, and technology gives
us those kind of choices. Whenever the surprise has been in the last 10 years, is that when
people are given the choice to push the slider, they are pushing it to the personalized transparent
side. The way I put this is that vanity trumps privacy. People would much, in other words,
are saying, treat me as an individual, personalized. I am unique. I am special. I'm not a number.
The cost of that is being transparent and then people say, fine. The other end of like,
I don't want anybody to know anything about me and just treat me as a number. Not so many
people are there. As we go into the future, the demands and the requirements of personalization
will require and encourage people to be transparent.
Do you think there will be aspect of, because Internet is coming out of the machines into
the world that we call the real world as we are experiencing, right? With virtual reality
and augmented reality. Do you think there will be aspect of it that will be an equivalent
of deep web and dark net that people can do many different things, a lot of them illegal
and at the same time stay anonymous?
Yeah. I think anonymity has to remain as an option, but it should be discouraged as much
as possible. You should keep it to the smallest amount. I liken it to a rare earth element
if you have the periodic table of all the elements. There are some elements that are
required by our cells biologically, so cadmium, arsenic. These are elements that we require
trace amounts that are necessary, almost like vitamins, that are necessary to have our cells
working. While they are necessary in very low amounts, in any significant amount, they're
toxic. The same thing with anonymity. We have to allow that as a possibility for the very
rare political persecution whistleblowers, but you want to keep it down to an absolute
minimum. If you have a lot of rare earth metals in your body, you die. If you have a lot of
anonymity on your website or your firm, you die. It's toxic. The uses of it are very,
very rare, are very special. We have to have that option, but to use it on a daily basis
is toxic. If you look at all the places where there's trolling, harassment, all this kind
of stuff, it all comes from places where people are anonymous or pseudo-anonymous because
it brings out the worst in people. We do need to have an option, but it should be really
kept and worked hard to keep it to the exception, to the rare earth element level of 0.00%.
It should be low. If there's a lot of anonymity, it's going to be toxic.
Even without being anonymous, I think the best example would be the Microsoft bot that they
put on Twitter and in 24 hours, it became into a monster basically.
That's because Twitter is often anonymous. It has nothing to do with the bot. It has
to do with the fact that Twitter allows anonymous accounts. It's the anonymity of Twitter that
caused it, not the bots. You don't see actually what happened in China. China did the same
thing. They had a bot that was programming, but because China requires you to have your
identity, a verified identity, there wasn't that same problem.
You're suggesting a system that has to verify your identity and it has to be a singular
identity because now it's not. I can be something in this world and I can be a completely different
person in let's say second life, but the world of second life is becoming more and more real.
Will there be VR companies or places that you can go to as anonymous? Yes, but I can
tell you right now that a lot of those places will be like 4chan. They won't be a very pleasant
place to be. That's all I can say. They won't be a pleasant place to be. There's also pseudo
anonymity, which is where you have a consistent, you don't have your real name, but you have
a consistent identity that can be linked back if needed with some effort. Boar people try
out different identities that can be linked back. Again, I think that we have to have
that option, but if it reaches any sizable degree, it becomes toxic.
To control those elements, essentially we need to regulate them again. What's the elements?
You give a very good example that if you go to a virtual reality company and want to sign
up with them, you definitely need to have an identity, but for that virtual reality
company to be required to collect your identity, they need to be regulated by a bigger body
of governance. I would imagine. No, I'm saying that. There's no government
entity that requires Facebook to try and verify your identity. They're doing it for business
reasons, is what I'm saying. Facebook, even now, requires that you be a real person. There's
no government regulation to that. That's their decision. The same thing with the VR. It's
I'm saying good business practice is going to dictate. If you want to have a place that
people are going to be comfortable with, you are going to require identities. I think there
will be, over time, just like Facebook's biggest asset, I believe, is their verified
identity. Other companies will either try to recreate that or many have many ride on
top of Facebook's verified identity. That becomes an extremely valuable thing because
they realize that if they want to have a place that people are comfortable with, they can't
have high anonymity. It's just toxic.
Well, you would agree that there will be alternative words. Let's say alternative social medias
that are based on anonymity and encryption. Because one side of it is that people like
Edward Snowden are warning us that government is monitoring you and using your information
for bad. Therefore, these are the tools that you have to say anonymous, to say encrypted
and all of that. But at the same time, you're making a very good point that more anonymity
will create more shadowy places that wrong kind of characters can.
Yeah, encryption should not be confused with anonymity. A lot of the information that, say,
flows back and forth between my computer and Facebook can be encrypted. Don't confuse encryption
with anonymity. Those are two different things. They have some overlap in some cases, but
they can be completely separate. My credit cards are encrypted, but they're
not anonymous. First of all, we do want encryption everywhere. We're only talking about anonymity
here, which is not the same as encryption. So don't confuse those two things.
What do you think about Bitcoin? I think Bitcoin is really interesting. The thing about Bitcoin,
of course, is that it's only one of a hundred different cryptocurrencies. The thing about
the cryptocurrencies is that you can kind of engineer them in any way. Bitcoin happens
to have anonymity engineered into that, but it doesn't have to be. You can have a version
of a cryptocurrency that is not anonymous. I think that the anonymity of Bitcoins is
completely distracting to its really fundamental breakthrough, which is the blockchain. So the
blockchain is the real core thing. The anonymity is actually harmful to it in the long term,
but the blockchain is the really brilliant technological innovation, which is a kind
of a distributed accounting system. It's distributed trust. It's a way of distributing trust.
I think actually in the long term that many governments will actually mandate blockchain
technology without the anonymity in order to make a completely accountable economy where
every single transaction is accounted for. Do you think the advancement of modern technology,
it's been advancing quite crazily after the turn of the century, it will essentially and
ultimately forces all the other aspects of society, economical, political, everything
to change with it. So we need a new political system. We need a new economic system.
Yeah, I think it's, you cannot use distributed peer to peer open source technology and not
have it affect your politics eventually.
You dropped out of college, if I'm correct, and backpacked around Asia taking photographs.
Would you talk a little about the experience and also the experience of learning from life
versus academic institutions?
Yeah, I mean, I was sort of grew, came to age in the kind of the arrow of the hippies
and I read the whole earth catalog, which said that you should invent your life. And
I took that to heart. I was in high school, I kind of was an overachiever. I doubled up
in math and science every year. And the problem with college, at least when I was there, my
first year, it was grade 13, it was more the same sitting in a classroom and I just, you
know, if they had had things like a gap year, or internships or something, but I needed
to do something at that point. And the only alternative I had was basically to do it myself.
So I dropped out and went to Asia as a photographer, which was a passion of mine at that point.
And by the way, this was at a time when very few people had cameras. I tried to describe
this to my kids where a family would have a little brownie camera and they would have
a roll of film in it and they would get it developed. It would have like 24 exposures
and they would get it developed and it would come back and there would be pictures of Easter,
4th of July, and Halloween on the same roll. I remember those days.
24 pictures for a year. Okay. So that, you know, the average family might have taken
24 pictures in a year. And so I had a camera and I filled my backpack with 500 rolls of
film, which was, you know, been saving up for forever to buy, almost no clothes. And
I would take, I would shoot two rolls a day. That was 70 pictures and I would come back
and I would tell people that I shot two rolls of film and their eyes would bug out. That
would just be unbelievable. 70 pictures in one day. What are you shooting?
So I was often the only person with a camera within 100 miles in different parts of Asia.
So that's what I did and what I got from that was I experienced a whole continent basically
that was in transformation. But when I arrived in places like Afghanistan or Nepal, I had
arrived in a time machine. I had gotten into a time machine and I traveled back to the
1500s. I landed there and it was in every respect, the 1500s. The, I mean, their lives
had not changed the feudal mindset, the feudal culture. There was no metal. There was, I
mean, every, there was no electricity. There was no TV. There was no radio. I mean, there
was, it was 1500s. And so I had the experience of living in the past in a real way in these
cultures. And so when I, when came out of that into, you know, the capital cities and
back to the US, I could see with my own eyes and witness it with my own being what technology
was doing, what progress was, the fact that the progress was real and what it was like
to not have technology because I lived in that time when there wasn't these things.
So I got a very good sense of the benefits of progress and technology.
Did you go to Iran too? I'm originally from Iran. That's why I'm curious.
I lived in Iran.
Oh yeah, which city?
Tehran.
This is in 70.
79, 79 during the Khomeini Revolution. I lived in Medan Fadosi down the carpet bazaar.
Wow.
Fair the, all the chanting and the demonstrations, death to Americans was happening. And I would,
I would actually lived above a carpet shop and I would come down and hang out with the
people. And when the cameras weren't on, they were talking to me and the newest American
and they say, we love Americans. We just hate your government. And I thought, oh my gosh,
I wish Americans were that sophisticated.
So I was learning Farsi, which I've also, I was going to school learning Farsi, which
I've mostly forgotten, but I would have probably still be in Iran if I hadn't been kicked out
because I loved it. And I unfortunately saw very little of it because the day I arrived,
the day I arrived in Iran, I came here from Afghanistan, there was a day that they had
the helicopter shooting the students from the helicopters. And I was like, travel was
really hard. You know, it was, it was anyway, so I never got to Persepolis and we got to
Esfahan someday.
Yeah, you were there at the very key moment.
And yes, yeah, it was, it was, yeah, it was a bad time for Iran. It really fell.
You know, unfortunately, it's very sad what's, what's been happening and what's still happening
to that country.
Yeah.
You mentioned.
Someday I'll return.
Yeah. Yeah. That would be awesome.
I'll tell you, I have a lot of fans in Iran. I'm in touch with a lot of Iranians and the
people who are into technology and they go to Sharif University. All those people are
big fans.
Yeah, yeah, I know. And I occasionally get emails from them. And, and I, you know, would
very much like to go back and visit. In fact, I was just talking to a friend of mine who
Tyler McNeven, who was for the past six years has been, we're trying to work with the government
to do a project. He calls Iran Iran, which he wants to run the length of Iran and make
a film about it, just meeting the people on the way. And several times it came very close
to giving. Actually, they started one time. They gave him permits. He started, he ran
part of it. And then they just kind of, I don't know, something happened. And so, so
he hasn't been able to complete it. But we were just talking just a couple of weeks ago
about, well, maybe we'd just go back as tourists at this point.
Yeah, it's politics against all the good ideas.
Yeah, yeah. No, I mean, again, I loved Iran. I loved the Iranians. I just, it was just
really great. But I haven't seen enough of it, of the country to really claim the day.
Yeah, hopefully one day.
Yeah.
Speaking of politics, how do you see the politics in the US affecting the growth of technology?
Well, you know, the rise of Trumpism is a real step backwards in that most of the jobs
that causing the anger for people are not, they haven't been taken by China. They've
been taken by technology. I mean, it's automation. Outsourcing is just the first step in robots.
So whatever goes to China will go into robots. In fact, China itself, 1 million people work
for Foxconn, which makes the iPhones, they've committed even three or four years ago to
buy 1 million robots. So they're going to automate, China is beginning to automate their
own work. And so these things are inevitable. Automation, AI robots are inevitable, and they're
going to cause even more friction, conflict, as some of the tasks that we currently do,
or many of the tasks that we currently do, whether we're manual or white color, are
going to go to the bots. And so I think this is, I think some of the backlash is just beginning.
There's going to be more of it. But I think my message would be that this is nothing to
do with other countries because it's happening there too. This is about automation and we
can't stop it. We can't prohibit it. We have to embrace it. We have to, so in the future,
in 20 years from now, people will be paid with how well you work with an AI robot. That
will be the skill. You're going to work with them, not against them, but understanding,
being able to talk, to converse well, partner with AI robot is going to be the very valuable
skill. And that's sort of what we should be teaching.
Interesting. How would you categorize that skill? Like if you want to call someone a
doctor or an engineer, what would be the title of that person? Or this will be around the
fields.
It'll be around the fields. But in fact, doctoring is one of the things that was just going
that direction. So the Watson, which is being retrained after playing Jeopardy, is being
trained as a diagnostic doctor. And their market is not people in Africa with a smartphone
accessing that because you could do that and that would be better than no doctor. But it
actually requires a certain, to get the most out of it, requires a certain amount of intelligence
to working with the person. So it's like the patient doesn't quite know how to make the
best use of the AI, but the doctor does. And so it's the doctor plus the AI that are going
to be the best diagnosis. It's not just the AI itself, not the doctor by itself, it's
the doctor plus AI.
So doctors who learn, it's like learning how to search or learning, being a power user
for Google. They'll be power users, AI power users who really know how the AI thinks, how
to best optimize its knowledge and its use. And they know people too. So they're kind
of like the interface. And so that will certainly be for several decades, that will be the,
I think, the pattern, which is you have AI plus humans as being the world's expert.
It's also true by the way right now in chess. When Gary Kasparov, the world chess champion
lost to Deep Blue, the IBM Deep Blue, he complained afterwards saying, look, you know, Deep Blue
had a record of every single chess play ever. All chess moves. He said, if I had access
to that same database while I was playing, I would have beat Deep Blue. So he made a
new chess league called the Freestyle Chess League. And there you could play, humans could
play with AI database. And so now it's freestyle because you can play any, it's like kind of
freestyle martial arts. You can play any method you want. You can play as a single, solitary
human chess champ. You could play as an AI or you can play as what they call centaurs
and AI plus human. And in the past couple of years, the world's best chess player on
the planet is not an AI. It's not a human. It's a centaur. It's an AI plus human. And
that's just showing you that that partnership is really the way that we're going to go at
least for the first couple of decades.
Oh, I totally agree. And that makes a lot of sense because I was going to say that access
to database is one thing, but processing all that information to the speed that AI is.
But yeah, that makes a lot of sense. Speaking of AI, some prominent figures in the world
of tech expressed their concern about negative possibilities that can be caused by the rise
of artificial intelligence. Where do you stand on pros and cons of artificial intelligence?
Yeah, yeah. I mean, it's certainly, we have to consider that possibility. And I think
even though I think that possibility is very, very low and very unlikely for a number of
reasons, I think that the solution to that problem is something we should be doing anyway.
So I endorse the solution, which is that we want to train our AIs to be, to have values,
to be ethical and moral. And that's what's happening right now. There's Google has a
group. They're trying to teach the ethics to the self-driving cars because you have
to, you have to program all that kind of stuff in beforehand. So like, who, if there's an
accident with pedestrian, who should get priorities? Should it be the passenger or the pedestrians?
You have to actually decide that right now. And so those are ethical questions. And
I was going to ask you about ethics and morality. Then first of all, do you think it's objective
and how we would translate from organic analog human thought process to a digital machine
process? Yeah, I think we humans overestimate the uniqueness or the distinctiveness. And
that's that's the humans. And we're not that much. Most of what we can do, including our
emotions can be programmed. And that's been the sort of never ending surprise. We keep
being surprise, surprise, surprise, surprise. And we should realize by now that things that
we thought only humans can do, obviously machines can do. And then once they machines
do, we say, of course, machines can do that. That's just machine learning. Well, yeah,
so emotions will be programmed into machines. It's not that difficult, and they'll be very
valuable to have emotions in machines. Our animals, our pets have emotions. And so it's
not, it's not just us. And so most of the things that animals can do, it's just kind
of programming will program into machines. And so ethics turns out to be, it turns out
that actually humans are not very good at ethics. We're very inconsistent. We're very
opportunistic, we're very situationalist, relativistic. But what's going to happen as
we try to program them into machines, we're going to realize this and actually will help
us to become better, just like just like having children makes you a better person. We're
going to try to teach our mind children, our technological children, ethics, we will we
will divide we will realize and we will make ourselves better ethically, because we'll
see the inconsistencies and we'll try to overcome them.
Kevin has a new book coming. It's called the inevitable understanding the 12 technological
forces that will shape our future. I think it's coming in June.
That's right. June 7 is the pub date. It's available on Amazon for preorder right now.
Excellent. We talked a little about future. I want to ask you about another future is
Ray Kurzweil. I know you respect him, but you disagree with his perhaps optimism about
the singularity. Do you think the singularity is near?
So yeah, I've known Ray for a while and I respect him and actually I'm in total agreement
with his optimism, except I disagree with his idea about the singularity. So I'm optimistic
without the singularity. The singularity just to recap, I think there's two versions, at
least two versions of it, maybe more. I would kind of reduce them right now in a kind of
oversimplification as being a strong singularity and a weak one. The strong one is the one
that Ray believes and it's that intelligence explosion where you make an AI and AI gets
so smart that it can design an AI that's smarter than itself and then that AI will then design
an AI that's smarter than itself and each time it does it, it may do it a little quicker.
So from outside, it looks like all of a sudden once you make an AI that's smarter than humans,
it suddenly instantly is God. It's infinite wisdom and knowledge and the first thing it
does is it makes us immortal. It figures out how to make us immortal and once it's immortal,
then maybe it can even bring back the dead. So therefore, all these good things happen
once you have the first AI that's smarter than humans and so if you can live to that
point, whatever year that is, then you'll live forever. Ray believes that and that's
why he's taking 250 pills a day because he wants to live until that moment so that he
can actually resurrect his father. I don't even know where to begin to say all the reasons
why I think that's not going to happen. There's two couple things. One is he just says, well,
we're on exponential growth of computation and therefore the singularity is near. Well,
there's the thing. Any point on an exponential curve is near the singularity. That's the
whole thing. I mean, it's like the singularity was near 200 years ago if we're on a singularity
curve and it will be 200 years from now. It's always by definition the singularity is always
near on an exponential curve. Second thing is that I think this idea that an AI will
both either can design itself smarter or make us immortal is what I call the fallacy of
think-ism, which is that by thinking about things, you can solve problems. So the idea
is that if you had an AI that's really smart, it would read all the medical literature in
the world and then cure cancer. That's not how you cure cancer. You can't cure cancer
by thinking about it. We don't have enough information. You have to perform experiments.
There's just so much we don't know that we're not going to get out by thinking about it,
no matter how smart we are. We have to actually do experiments which take biological time
and most of them fail. And no matter how smart you are, you have to spend a lot of time
doing experiments on biological subjects like humans, which just take times. Even simulations
aren't enough to answer those questions because you have to ground-proof assimilation. So
this idea that AI's can do these things, including making themselves more just by thinking
about it, is just a total fantasy. You mentioned the examination through experimentation.
Isn't the part of the argument that the part of examination also will be done by AI and
robotics, nanobots, for example, in our bloodstream and between our neurons. So on both sides,
there will be machines and nanobots and AI doing the work. My thinking is that why would
they want to do something that we can survive because they will have very different values
based on the needs that they will have?
So I think, as I said back, I think we can put our values into the AI's we make. I think
the whole point of cultural evolution is that it's not necessarily Darwinian. There's every
reason. One of the things we realize as humans in our culture is that the more species, the
more variety diversity is a good thing for the economy, for ourselves. So we want to
have as many different ways of thinking. And one of the things, going back to this whole
thing of AI, and this is another point, is that we tend to think of intelligence as a
single dimension. It's not a single dimension. Our own intelligence is a whole suite, a spectrum
of probably about 100 different types of thinking from spatial deduction, rationalization, emotional
intelligence. I mean, there's hundreds of them. We don't have a general purpose intelligence
at all. If we have a very, very specific kind of collective of intelligence suited to our
survival evolutionarily. First of all, the only way you can make this kind of intelligence
is to have the same substrate, a biological substrate. But secondly, there's not much
reason to make this suite, this collective of intelligences, artificially. What we want
and what we're doing is making other kinds of thinking. So your calculator is smarter
than you are in arithmetic, your GPS is smarter than you are in spatial navigation, Google
is smarter than you are in total recar. And the self-driving car will drive in an inhuman
way. That's the whole point. That's why we want it driving. We don't want it to drive
like a human. And so what we'll be doing is making different species of thinking. They'll
think differently. The AIs that we're going to make are going to think differently than
humans. That's their main value, because we can get them to help us, work with us to
solve problems that we can't. So these are going to be different species. And the AIs
won't be able to think like us. Our thinking will be different. And there's every reason
to work with us. This idea that the AIs need to kill us is just a crazy, insane Hollywood
trope. It's a cliche. It doesn't make any sense at all. I can't really think of it.
In fact, I think that would be even hard to do, even if it was your job to program this.
I don't think you could do it.
Isn't it interesting that humans find that scenario interesting enough?
Yeah, right. And it's kind of the only vision of the AI future is they take over and terminate
us. And I think it's because this is so cinematic. I mean, it's just a cheap cinematic device.
And the idea that they would find is useful. But more importantly, it's not going to be
that separate from us. And this is the other important thing. So that was the strong version.
I think the weak version of the singularity is that we are making a planetary super-organism
of something, that we are weaving ourselves 7 billion people plus 15 quintillion computers
and smartphones together into one thing that's always on, that there is an intelligence at
this higher level that we can't understand.
So the whole point of the singularity is you can't see beyond it. The insight was that
you have something that was the original idea of the singularity is that there's a horizon
beyond which you cannot see at all. And that you can't even imagine. And I think that there's
a soft version of that where we have a planetary intelligence that we as neurons sort of can't
really understand. And that seems to me to be very, very likely. Again, we are then part
of the thing. So really not this sense of us against them. It's like, no, we are them.
It is us. We're part of it. We may not understand it when it does stuff, but that's us. And
so I think that's a second reason. So on that kind of singularity, I'm saying, yeah, I think
there could be this soft singularity where the future and what happens is really hard
for us to see because we have this thing that has not existed before and it has its own
thoughts.
Do you have a frame for that or we just don't know?
Yes, it's now. We've already begun. I mean, we're building it now. And I'm trying to take
this idea seriously. It's not just the metaphor. I think, no, we really do have a machine that's
I think the things like the flash crash in the world finance system is an example of
kind of like a synchronized thought or something that happens globally. We're not even sure
why it happened. And we will never know. And I think those are the kinds of things that
we'll see more of.
Yeah, I agree. Things are changing and changing fast at the planetary level. So a lot of the
impossible things that we have encountered like Wikipedia are because we have a technology
to allow a billion people to collaborate in real time. That's never happened before.
Most of the kind of cool things are happening, social media, all these other things are due
to the fact that we now have this technology to allow collaboration, cooperation in real
time at the planetary scale.
Speaking of cool things, the cover story of the May issue of Wired Magazine is about
this mysterious unicorn startup, Magic Leap, who as stated on the cover of this month,
Wired are on the quest to create a new kind of reality. Now you spent some time with them
and wrote it.
And by the way, I wrote the article.
Yes, I was exactly going to say that you spent some time and wrote that extensive piece
about them. Would you explain to our listeners what exactly Magic Leap is and what did they
do and why are they so important that without a better version of even being available to
the developers, they raise more than a billion dollars?
Yeah, I can't explain the last one. I mean, why people have given them so much money. So
I did get to see the current version of their technology and I saw all the other VR companies
as well. And a lot of the demos and most of the content that was available say at the
first of the year. And Magic Leap, there's two distinct brands, two different categories
of virtual reality. There's the VR, which is you put on the headset, the goggles and
you are immersed into a total world. So everything you see is this synthetically created world.
And then there's what they call MR or AR, Mixed Reality or Augmented Reality. There's
some transitions, MR or AR. And that is where you were kind of a transparent spectacle like
a pair of glasses and you see your room or even outside or your office. And then the
virtual is inserted into or on top of or within the real world that you see. So you can see
virtual objects or you can see virtual people or you can see virtual screens.
So MR and AR are the same thing. MR and AR are basically the same thing. And if you
can do MR or AR, you can do VR because all you have to do is turn the lights in the room
down and fill, not just an object, but you can fill everything in. So technically, VR
is a subset of MR or AR, we'll call it MR. So VR is a subset of MR, meaning that again,
if your technology can do MR really, really well, you can easily do VR too. So technically,
MR is more difficult to do. And magically it's doing MR, which is this augmented mixed
reality where you have a pair of visors or spectacles or glasses, which are mostly kind
of clear. And you can see everything around you, but you have this virtual aspect to it.
And the thing about magic leaf stuff is that it really does appear as if it's there. Now
the it, the image is there's no pixels that you can detect. It's pretty stationary, but
the lighting is off. And let me say this is that to really pass for that as to be really
real, the virtual object would have to be lit with the same light that's in the room
that you're in. And that would require another level of computation of detecting and measuring
all the light in the room as you move around and reproducing that entire lighting onto
the virtual object. That does not happen right now. So what that means, and there's a couple
other glitches or things to overcome, what that means is that what you see today in the
MR is a artificial looking, it's an artificial thing. It doesn't look real, but it looks
really present. So its presence is absolutely real. It's like having, you know, so there's
often there's a fantasy thing, you know, it's a baby elephant or it's a little robot thing,
or it's Mickey Mouse or it's a person, but they don't look entirely real in that room
because the lighting is off among other things. But their presence is absolutely real. You're
totally convinced. And that's the same thing with VR is even in the cartoon world, you
know that it can't really be real world, but you really feel present that presence is real.
And so that real presence is sort of the key because what's happening with VR and MR is
that what you're getting is we're moving from internet of information to internet of experiences.
So the experiences are real. They're incredibly vivid. They feel you feel them rather than
know them. And there's a huge difference there between knowing things like information and
feeling them. And that shift is going to be very, very important. I think VR the most
important, the most interesting things in VR are not other landscapes, not other objects,
but other people. And I think VR is going to be the most social of all the social media
that we have.
Is there any audio aspect to what they do as well?
Oh, yeah, absolutely. So there's actually 3D or, you know, by neuro or audio. So it's
not stereo, it's beyond stereo. Because to do true 3D audio, the audio has to change
depending on where you are as you move around the room. So it's not just that you have a
sense of three dimensions. It's a sense that you have like four dimensions. It's X. So
it's changing.
Motion tracking, basically.
Yeah, right. Motion tracking. So they have, there's bionary recording, which is a different
way of recording things so that you actually have a full, true three-dimensional recording
that you can actually navigate through. And that's a large part of it. And it turns out
that actually your hands, the tactile, having hands touching, moving your whole body, having
vibrations come back is 50% or more than 50% of the total sensation or this total illusion
of being there. And that that is a huge part in a lot of the, some of the new arcades,
the VR arcades. Take advantage of that by, you know, giving you a vest that you wear
in gloves and other things where you can actually feel your whole body is there. And then that
transportation is incredible. You really are somewhere different.
How can someone write for Wired Magazine?
I think the general path, and this is true not just for Wired, is with small stuff, start
writing small things. So I think generally most of the writers who've come to Wired have
been writing somewhere else first. So they either have a blog, they have an audience,
or they're writing little things, probably the digital side first. They're doing little
short things. And they are noticed and they move on to longer things that seems to be
the general pattern.
We've been talking to Kevin Kelly, his upcoming book, Inevitable, understanding the 12 technological
forces that will shape our future. I'm going to ask you the final question that I ask all
my guests. And that's, if you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization,
what would you say as the worst thing that humanity has done? And what would you say
as humanity's greatest achievement?
I think the worst thing that we've done would have to be the enslavement and the dehumanization
of races of people who we declared were not really us. So that kind of completely artificial
arbitrary separation. And I would say, depending on the circumstances, but the best thing we
would have done would have been meeting an alien in another planet. I mean, that's going
to be an achievement that would be quite remarkable. I don't think we're going to meet them on
our own planet. I think there's just going to be a restriction for AIs not to interfere
with us, so they're not going to reveal themselves. But I think our ability to make contact with
another one will be our greatest achievement to that point.
