He believed in an infinite series of times, in a dizzily growing, ever-spreading network
of diverging, converging, and parallel times.
This web of time, the strands of which approach one another, bifurcate, intersect, or ignore
each other through the centuries, embraces every possibility."
Rizwan Virk, welcome back to Neohuman Podcast this time, the 96th episode, sir.
Well, thanks so much for having me on again.
I enjoyed our conversation last time, so it's always fun to be back.
Amazing.
And congratulations on your new book, which we're going to talk a lot about and everything
about and around it, The Simulated Multiverse, an MIT computer scientist explores parallel
universes, the simulation hypothesis, quantum computing, and the Mandela Effect, which I
believe is a continuation of your first book that we talked about the first time you were
here, The Simulation Hypothesis, right?
Yeah, that's right.
It's sort of a sequel in a way, even though it's not fiction, so it's not quite a sequel
in the same way that The Lord of the Rings might be.
But I had wrapped up my first book, and I'd given a talk at Google in Mountain View, California,
where the Googleplex headquarters is, and one of my old colleagues from MIT had just
started working for Google, and he was visiting Mountain View.
So we sat down, and we were having coffee.
And he said, you know, I've been reading your book, and what you're talking about, this
idea of a simulation helps to explain this strange thing called the Mandela Effect.
Have you heard of it?
And I said, yeah, I've heard of it, but I dismissed it as just kind of faulty memory
on the part of a bunch of people.
And so that actually led me down this rabbit hole of exploring this idea of multiple timelines
and doing a big what-if scenario.
And so the second book is saying, well, what if, you know, these people who are reporting
different memories aren't totally crazy?
What does quantum physics have to say about this?
What does computer science have to say about this?
What does the simulation theory have to say about this?
And so the new book is kind of a mix of these different themes and bringing them together
into this new model.
Yeah, a very interesting thing about you is that you bring, it's kind of at least an attempt,
I would say, to unify science and spirituality and religion into some kind of singular comprehensive
understanding of what is going on beyond this physical reality of experience that we are
having based on the limitation of ourselves, not only biologically, but also ideologically.
Would that be accurate to say?
Yeah, I think that would be accurate to say.
I mean, someone asked me once, you know, well, why did you write this book?
And my main, for my first book, for the simulation hypothesis, part of my motivation was to try
to bridge this ever increasing gap between science and religion.
And I feel like the point of mystics is to try to understand the true nature of reality.
And the point of science is to try to understand the true nature of reality.
And the point of philosophy is to try to understand the nature of reality.
That each is doing it with completely different tools and they don't always talk to each other.
And you know, if you go back, you know, 500 years to the time of Galileo and the church,
you might say that the church had what academics like to call epistemological dominance.
This is the way we think about it.
The only way we know how to do it is because God said it was in the Bible.
Now we've shifted to the other extreme, right?
We have this epistemological dominance of the scientific worldview and that dismisses
other points of view, whether it's shamanism or it's, you know, mystical view from the
Eastern traditions or even the Western religions.
And so I believe simulation theory gives us at least a framework where we can combine
these different worldviews, but also understand them both as different aspects of the search
for truth.
And it's one of the few frameworks I've come across where I can talk about it with people
that are PhDs in science and with technologists in Silicon Valley, but also with Buddhist
monks and people that are, you know, adherence to a particular religion as well.
And so there are very few topics that you can kind of universally talk about and it's
a framework that lets us to do that.
You might say it's an interactional or translational framework in a way, because it translates
language of one into language that the other can understand and actually agree with.
This scientific and academic orthodoxy that we're dealing with right now, would you say
that science has turned into scientism and a lot of scientists have turned into priests
and basically the entire approach had turned into a religion and religious ideological
kind of an approach rather than scientific curiosity that, you know, science is never
settled.
It's not perfectly part of the nature of science to challenge ideas and to have debate and
conversation about it, but we seem to be dealing with people who are more of a bureaucrats
than people like Carl Sagan, for example, people who are politicians and not really
interested in, as you're saying, finding or at least attempting to finding the nature
of reality.
Yeah, I think very much that, you know, science has turned into this, what is called scientism
sometimes, and it's this idea that our way of knowing is the only way of knowing and
if we haven't endorsed it, if our priests or our members of our community haven't reached
a consensus.
Now, it's obviously not the same as existing religions, but there is this element, you
know, part of what I'm doing now is I'm actually studying the history of science and technology
at ASU, working on a PhD, which I just started actually, and we're looking at the social
construction of science.
And so there used to be a point of view, particularly in for much of the 20th century, that scientists
have access to the truth and nobody else has access to the truth.
And when you kind of open the box and look in a little bit and you see, well, what does
that mean?
How is science constructed?
You realize that it's a socially constructed thing in that there are different ways of
looking at things.
There are different ways of funding different types of experiments, and so which experiments
get funded and which get taken seriously.
And there's something called boundary work, where it's kind of pushing back on other areas
of knowledge to say that's not science, therefore we're not going to take that seriously.
And so you've seen a concerted effort to do this.
And so as I said, it was kind of a response to the dominance of the other side in the
past, but now we've gone too far, I think, in the direction of science where other ways
of knowing and other realities and even anecdotal examples are pushed out.
For example, people used to report seeing rocks fall from the sky back before the 1800s,
but the scientists in Europe said, well, that's ridiculous, because there are no rocks in
the sky.
Therefore, we are going to assume that you're lying or you're crazy or misinformed, and
you see that same attitude, for example, with UFO reports, which are very anecdotal.
And only recently now we're starting to see people like Avi Loeb at Harvard, who was the
previous head of the astronomy department, who are trying to create a real scientific
effort to study.
And so I think too often the priorities in science are not necessarily driven by curiosity
about the world, but how to advance the specific set of knowledge, the kind of this edifice
that we've built without going back and reexamining that maybe there's parts of this edifice in
the foundation that aren't quite right and that there are holes in that.
And that's what many of these anomalous experiences are showing us, is that our cosmological model
of the world, just like before, we didn't know there were asteroids beyond Earth, therefore
they couldn't fall to Earth.
Same thing here.
We don't acknowledge that there are any other realities beyond the physical, therefore we
can't conceive that any such thing like a shaman having a non-ordinary reality experience
could be a real experience, right?
That's just put into the realm of psychology and imagination.
So when you're saying this so-called scientism is not the same as religion, I totally agree.
But like your book, it seems like scientism is a sequel to conventional religions, which
hints, at least to me, to something much deeper within human nature, that we need religions,
we need this superior kind of an authority in order to set some kind of a point of alignment
for the collective of humanity to move towards, to strive towards, perhaps.
Right, and I think that may be a human need, it may be a social need of the way in which
our societies are constructed, right, because we now share communication much more freely
than we did in the past, and so we've got large groups of people that are part of, say,
a nation-state that are looking to the government, for example.
And so I think that's true, that there is a need for people to look to authority, and
you'll see these statements, well, you either trust science or you don't trust science.
And the more you look at it, you realize that for people that are in the know, that's not
that simple, right?
Scientists, true scientists, will never make these grandiose statements, right?
They will go in and make very specific statements about very specific experiments.
And that's all, if you read the scientific papers, that's all they're allowed to say.
But then when you translate that to the public, it becomes this broader understanding of everything
else is ridiculous, homeopathy doesn't work, we know it doesn't work, therefore everyone
who does it is a fraud, right?
So you get into those kinds of, I think, not just statements, but also you have a general
public that's looking for that authority.
Because most people want to believe what's told to them either in the media or by authority,
and then they repeat that.
And with social media, we have that happening ad infinitum, right?
So you have people repeating the same arguments that they've heard somewhere else.
There are very few people who actually might know the underlying scientific data or the
facts.
But this issue of who gets credibility and who doesn't is an interesting one.
And you can study that.
And within the scientific circles, there is a lot of effort to try to keep certain people
out of that.
A good example is the honeybees, right, what they call colony collapse disorder.
Many of the beekeepers say, well, it may have something to do with all these pesticides,
and they've had intuitions about it because they're seeing different movements of the
bees.
But the way that science has framed the issue of a particular pesticide is they will do
an experiment on a single pesticide, and if it doesn't cause a problem above a certain
threshold, that's considered safe.
They're not necessarily testing a whole bunch of these different things together.
And as such, they're trying to exclude the expertise of the beekeepers, for example,
when in fact they should be recognizing that there is some expertise here that comes from
a different kind of experience that should have a credibility in the debate as well.
So I definitely think that's there.
Now, that's not to say that science can't continue to improve.
I mentioned Avi Loeb and investigating UFOs.
That was an area that was considered, you know, stigmatized.
No one would do that at a respectable university for a while.
And now it's starting to open up.
And so you can see that even science evolves over time, mind, body, you know, connection
with meditation, reducing stress, leading to health benefits.
It's something that doctors 50 years ago would have said, yeah, you know, do it if you like,
but it's not going to help you.
And most doctors still have that attitude, but there has been enough research now to
suggest that doing yoga, doing meditation, these things to improve health, even if we
don't always understand the exact mechanism why.
How would you assess Google's perspective and approach within this context?
Because Google and YouTube, you know, their approach have been criticized and quite justly
because they're ranking based on their own, you know, preference and biases.
They're in many cases changing search results in order to, you know, direct people towards
a certain kind of outcome.
When you talk to them about this kind of thing and your book, how do they respond?
What are they thinking?
Because Google, I think, is even more important to talk about than a lot of governments considering
the amount of technological might and power that is under their control.
And they don't have checks and balances that, let's say, the American system, for example,
has embedded within it.
Yeah, well, you know, what I find is that, you know, people at Google, and I just gave
a talk there a few weeks ago, you know, they're pretty open to this idea of the simulation
hypothesis and this idea that there's computation underlying the physical universe.
And that's because they're coming at it from the point of view of computer science being
a software company.
So I think from that perspective, they're very open minded.
Yet, if you look at my talk at Google, my first one, you know, at the end, I was talking
about the matrix and a spoon being bent.
And I showed them some pictures from a spoon bending party that had just taken place in
Santa Clara, like the week before.
And they all started like, what is this guy doing?
He's showing us pictures of spoon bending?
We know that's false.
We know that doesn't happen, right, without examining their own beliefs of, well, why
do they believe it's false?
Because they heard it in the media.
They heard that it was discredited long ago, right?
Do they have any experience?
Have any of them ever gone to a spoon bending party?
Absolutely not.
So you definitely have a lot of that.
But I think what's happened is, you know, in the same way, if we went back 50 years,
there were primarily three networks with the news that was disseminated or broadcast and
you had to tune in at six or 11.
And that was it.
That was all you got, right?
And then there were certain newspapers.
And if you look at the history of that, you realize there was government priorities.
There were social priorities and there were priorities of the government that impacted
the media.
But because they became so pervasive, they were regulated in a certain way.
And so only certain stories made it out.
Now what's happened with Facebook and Google in particular and YouTube is they've gotten
so big that now you have the intersection of politics with technology, right?
It's no longer just about, you know, what does the technology say and the politics.
And so science is sort of informing, you know, a lot of that.
But also, so are the priorities.
And so because, for example, we've been in the middle of a pandemic, right, you see all
kinds of efforts within YouTube to basically ban anything that mentions any kind of, you
know, paranormal phenomenon, as opposed to because of the priorities of the society in
this case is, hey, we got to get out of this pandemic.
How do we do that?
And so not that I want to get too much into a debate on that.
It's kind of far and field from my work.
But I think you do get, you know, priorities that are set both by society and in terms
of what people are worried about and political intervention that we may not even know about.
So we may not even know about some of the discussions that have been going on to set
priorities and to decide what is acceptable knowledge and what is not acceptable knowledge.
And to me, you know, that's where I find that bringing in this idea of the metaphor
of a video game or an interactive video game, suddenly people who are hardcore atheists
say, well, I can see that beings from outside the simulation would look to us as if they
were supernatural because they have powers that we don't have and they have the ability
to control events and just as programmers can or super users can within video games.
And so I think there there may be ways to bridge this gap because it's been getting
wider and wider.
But that's part of my work, I think, and the reason I wrote these two books is to provide
a technological framework that says reality may be more complicated than what we think
it is.
Absolutely.
I had Jason Reza Georgiani on the show.
I don't know if you know him.
He has a new book, Closer Encounters, PhD professor, very well known, very controversial.
And his thesis is also that aliens are actually humans who at some point they discovered time
traveling capability and they're changing the timelines of our experience from the fifth
dimension.
And when I was going through your book, I'm like, holy shit, you basically are talking
about the same thing.
And he's getting mocked and ridiculed because of it.
And I'm sure you have come across a lot of people like, you just don't know what you're
talking about.
But more and more as we digitizing our reality, it seems like it is a completely feasible
at least possibility that we have to consider.
Yeah.
And I mean, I've heard of him, but I haven't read his book, so I didn't know about that
specific argument.
But yeah, I mean, I find that if I frame the discussion in terms of language and computer
science and information science, and you can tie that to the physics, because what's happening
in physics is over time, I think they're realizing that the physical world doesn't really exist.
And we might have talked about this last time, but there was John Wheeler, who was one of
the famous physicists of the 20th century at Princeton.
He worked with Einstein and with Bohr.
And he was the supervisor of Hugh Everett, who came up with a quantum multiverse idea,
which we can talk about in a minute.
But he came to the conclusion that physics went through three stages in his lifetime
in the 20th century.
It went from everything is a particle, right?
This is the old view of the Greeks that an atom is the smallest physical object, and
you just put them together, to everything is a field of probability, to the conclusion
that he came to, the only thing that defines a particle is a series of yes, no questions,
answers.
And those are bits of information.
I mean, that is exactly what a bit is.
It's a one or a zero.
And if you want to distinguish one particle from another, the only thing to distinguish
it are these kind of bits of information.
And so he came up with the phrase, it from bit.
So anything that seems like an it, like a physical object, like your microphone or my
computer or this table, right, is actually composed of bits of information.
And so I find that, you know, there's more agreement on that even today than there was,
you know, when he made that statement, which was back in the 80s, I think, when he came
up with that statement.
Today, you know, there's this area of digital physics, right?
In physics, we always talk about the conservation of matter or of energy.
Now there's an area where they're looking at the conservation of information, like how
much information is in the universe, which is represented by bits.
If you look at biology, the idea of a gene and DNA, it's really just a compact representation
of bits of information when then algorithms that you have for refining that information
and running it.
And so, you know, the conclusion that I came to was that the universe is a process that
is computationally irreducible, which is a term that was defined by Stephen Wolfram,
who created the Mathematica software and who was a physicist turned computer scientist.
And what that meant was you couldn't just find out what's going to happen by solving
a simple equation.
You had to run the steps.
So if you want to see what's going to happen in year 1000, you have to go run the simulation
up to year 999, and then you have to run 365 days of it.
And so, you know, millions of steps in the simulation.
And then you will see exactly what happens at that point in time.
And so, you know, I came to the conclusion that we may be living in this kind of a reality
where time is being run forward and then it's being rewound and can be rerun again.
Now, that makes no sense if you have a model of there's one timeline that goes from the
past to the future and there's one physical world.
So my previous book, The Simulation Hypothesis, was telling us the physical world is not what
we think it is.
It is mostly based on information.
This book is kind of about the fact that time is not what we think it is.
What we think of the future and the past are not the same.
And I talk about the delayed choice experiment, which was a thought experiment that John Wheeler,
who I just mentioned, came up with, you know, back in like the 60s, and it has to do with
the double slit experiment and with Schrodinger's cat.
And the whole idea is that the cat, we would think it's either alive or dead.
But within this thought experiment, quantum mechanics says the cat is in superposition
until we observe it and measure it, which means that it is both alive and dead.
Now that sounds ridiculous.
And even Schrodinger came up with the example because he said that sounds ridiculous.
It can't be both.
But even Schrodinger back in the 40s realized that quantum mechanics was telling us something
weird that there are what he called multiple simultaneous histories, right?
And the delayed choice experiment is a good way to think about this because if you think
of the cosmic version of it, we have, say, a quasar that is a billion light years away
sending us a light, and we have a gravitationally large object like a black hole or a galaxy
in the middle, and the light can go to the left or to the right, and we can have telescopes
here on Earth that can figure out, you know, which way did the light go because it will
just pick up the one that went left or the one that went right.
Now if that black hole is a million light years from us and the quasar is a billion
light years from us, when does the decision about whether to go left or right, you know,
when is that decision made?
It has to be made a million years ago because for the light to get here, it would take it
a million years.
But what the delayed choice experiment is telling us is it's not until we measure the
light here on Earth in the present that one of those possible pasts is chosen.
So this gets into just a strange idea about, you know, what is the past?
What does it mean for something to have happened, right?
And again, it seems nonsensical unless you start to think about a graph of possibilities
that shows all the different timelines, both going backwards and forward from the current
point in time.
And in this book, that is what I call the multiverse graph.
And in the simulated model, it makes more sense because what it means that something
happened just means that we are rendering that specific pathway through the multiverse
graph.
And I talked a little bit about this last time as well.
The reason we can create these very expansive 3D virtual worlds and MMORPGs like World of
Warcraft or Fortnite, where my avatar and your avatar are hanging out and we're walking
around and shooting at other people.
Back in the 80s, you couldn't do that.
You couldn't create games like that.
And you might say, well, we didn't have enough processing power, but we also didn't know
how to keep track of all those pixels.
And so what happened between then and now is we learned optimization techniques that
said render only that which is observed by your avatar.
And so we only rendered the particular probability or possibility that needs to be shown and
only that which can be seen.
And so the golden rule within video games is render only that which is observed.
Turns out that's the same golden rule that quantum mechanics is telling us.
We only render that which is observed.
And if you think of that, all the possibilities as being this giant graph of timelines, and
that's really what the quantum multiverse is all about.
It's about different choices and different timelines.
Then that gives us a new and interesting way to think about it, which I call the simulated
multiverse.
Can I read you a poem?
Sure.
Absolutely.
It's called Infinite Parallel Universes, universes, parallel, infinite, all here, slightly different
like radio waves, tune in with a choice, tune out with a choice, each choice a path to live
the consequences, each path a chance, slightly different, all here, infinite, parallel universes.
That's great.
That's very much along the same ideas that I've been writing about.
Is that a poem that you wrote or one that you found?
Last June, I woke up in a, I don't want to promote my book, but I would love to send
you a copy.
I woke up for like three weeks and right when I woke up, a poem came to my head, just like
in an instant and I wrote it and it was gone.
I had no other poems, like I didn't think I was a poet or anything like that.
And then there were 22 of them.
I think there were like 19 of them actually.
I had two from before, I kind of revised them and made them into a book.
As I said, I would love to send you a copy, but it seems like exactly what you're talking
about.
Yeah very much.
There's a great story that I mentioned in the book from like the early 20th century
called The Garden of Forking Paths by Jorge Luis Borges, who I think was a South American
writer that I think is very, very related to what you wrote there.
So it may be something that you want to check out, but in The Garden of Forking Paths, it's
about a labyrinth in which all men will lose their way and an ancient Chinese writer who
wrote this book and they couldn't quite figure out what he was writing because it didn't
make any sense.
There were all these different possibilities and stuff and you have a scientist who kind
of figures that out in the present and he says that the Garden of Forking Paths is a
picture, incomplete yet not false, of the universe such as this particular Chinese ancestor
of the person talking conceived it to be different, differing from Newton and Schopenhauer.
Your ancestor did not think of time as absolute and uniform.
He believed in an infinite series of times in a dizzily growing, ever-spreading network
of diverging, converging and parallel times.
This web of time, the strands of which approach one another, bifurcate, intersect or ignore
each other through the centuries, embraces every possibility.
And so I quote that in the simulated multiverse.
So yeah, I'd be happy to take a look.
I think your poem is a great example of exactly that.
Yeah, this really is a convergence of everything that humanity has been developing and figuring
out and dreaming and imagining, which begs the question, are we digitizing the world
or are we just unveiling the world that is already digital at its core and at its nature?
Because it seems like, sorry to jump when you were...
We are building the metaverse now, and metaverse technically has the potential to simulate
this reality, but man-made, for lack of a better term.
Now man is enhanced by technology, but it seems like the core of reality isn't that
much of a difference from what we've been building towards, each part being a sequel
to the previous part, all building towards this ultimate discovery of the world that
is digital.
Yeah, I mean, I think you're on the right track there.
So there's a lot of talk about the metaverse these days, and Facebook changed its name
as a company to Meta to show how important the metaverse is going to be to its future.
And so some people say, well, that's just to get away from all the negative press, the
social media, but Zuckerberg has been interested in this idea of the metaverse, which comes
from a 1992 science fiction novel called Snow Crash by a cyberpunk type of novel by Neil
Stevenson.
And so the metaverse is very much about building virtual worlds, and there are what I call
the threads of the metaverse.
And one of those threads is sort of mirroring the physical world in the digital world.
And how I got interested in simulation theory is actually along these lines.
So back in 2016, I was visiting a startup that was doing virtual reality, and I put
on the headset and I started to play ping pong.
And it was so realistic in the responsiveness that for a moment I forgot that I was in virtual
reality, and I tried to put the paddle down on the table and I tried to lean against the
table just like I might do at the end of an actual table tennis game.
And of course, to paraphrase the matrix, there is no table.
So the controller fell to the floor and I almost fell over.
And that's when I started to realize that eventually our virtual reality will get so
good that it'll be indistinguishable.
And I call that point the simulation point, at the point where we can build something
like the matrix ourselves.
And so I laid out the 10 stages of technology that we would have to get there, and it turns
out these are very related to the metaverse, right?
So the metaverse is we're building it today is in kind of the stages that we're at on
the road to the simulation point.
So enhanced AR and VR, also, you know, we are starting to discover augmented reality
where we can place digital objects in the world around us, which eventually we will
be able to do this without the glasses, using light field technology.
So we're blurring the line between what is digital and what is physical.
I call that, you know, the holodeck scenario, right, where we would be able to walk into
a room and see things that aren't there.
But to us, it would seem like they are.
And similarly, our 3D printers are getting so good that they can start to print things
out like in Star Trek, the next generation, you know, when Captain Picard used to go and
say tea, Earl Grey hot, and the replicator would just create the cup and the tea.
Now we're not quite there yet, but we can create the cup.
We can actually 3D print cups now, but we can't necessarily, you know, in the same printer
print the liquid, but eventually we'll get there.
But then we get into this area of brain computer interfaces, right, where we can send in what
is digital information into the brain and fool ourselves in the brain to not realize
that where we are is a virtual digital world.
And so that leads eventually to this simulation point where, you know, we are having an experience
like the Matrix.
And so when I started to research this area of simulation theory, I discovered Nick Bostrom,
who is at Oxford, who basically said that if any civilization ever gets to that point,
right, then we're already likely in a simulation because they'll be able to create so many
different digital simulations.
All you have to do is crank up another server that with infinite variety that we're more
likely to be in one of those.
And so I think that, you know, part of why the findings of quantum mechanics are so bizarre,
right, Niels Bohr said, if you are not shocked by these findings, then you haven't understood
quantum mechanics, right, is because we think we're in a physical world.
And so very much if we can get there, and my conclusion is we can get there in 100,
200 years where we can create, you know, these perfect digital replicas of what we think
of as the physical world because we're starting to discover the algorithms, the procedural
generation that's used in biology to generate, you know, flora and fauna, for example.
There, you know, there are all kinds of algorithms, fractal, etc., that are starting to be able
to replicate that.
There was a game, a video game called No Man's Sky a few years ago, which had like 18 quintillion
planets and each one had its own unique set of flora and fauna and animals because they
can all be procedurally generated, which gets back to this idea that at its core, the universe
may be more about information and optimizing the storage and transfer of that information
than it is about physical objects, the way that we would think about them in common sense.
So yeah, I mean, I think the metaverse is the stages which we would need to go through
to get to that simulation point and then we would discover that not only can we totally
reproduce the world in digital form, the world already has this underlying structure of digital
information, which means we might already be in somebody else's simulation.
Some people are completely freaked out by Facebook's attempt to build a metaverse because,
and I think it's well-funded that Zuckerberg wants to play the role of God, basically.
He wants to be the creator of this world, that it can expand to physical world and every
aspect of our lives, basically.
So it seems like centralization versus decentralization is something that philosophically we always
have talked about, but now we have the technological tool to democratize that decentralization
in order to build this kind of thing, which is another reason that I'm thinking maybe
this whole thing, if there is a purpose for humanity, maybe the purpose is to figure out
this digital nature of reality and all of these steps seem like they totally make sense
to get there.
But beyond that, which I would love to hear your comments with respect to a form of governance
that we need moving forward, dealing with this kind of a possibility that everybody
will be able to basically create their own reality, you know, at first in VR, but then
in AR and mixed reality, right?
But also, how can we ever get to truly recognize and understand the nature of reality, which
is quantum, while our experience is binary?
Well, so there was a lot there that you mentioned.
And so, you know, starting with the first part, and Zuckerberg and Facebook trying to
dominate the metaverse, and, you know, I think that, you know, they're still operating on
a slightly older imaginary, which is a term that's used in academia, social technical
imaginary for how science fiction might represent what could happen in the future.
And when we talk about the metaverse, you know, we're also talking about the imaginaries
that we buy into, whether it's Snow Crash, or Ready Player One, which came out a few
years ago, where everyone put on the virtual reality headsets.
And they use that to go to school, they use that to go to work for relationships to explore
the world, and became the most valuable company in the world.
And, you know, I think, you know, Zuckerberg is operating off of that imaginary, because
he wants to be the company that controls all of that.
But technology has a way of innovating and catching up, and sometimes surpassing the
old imaginaries.
You know, if we look, go back to William Gibson's, you know, Neuromancer, where he defined the
term cyberspace, right, it's the internet has evolved very differently from that.
And even Snow Crash, the metaverse has evolved differently from that.
And so today, we have a decentralization mechanism called the blockchain, right, which lets us
have digital assets that are owned by individuals that are not necessarily owned by, you know,
just one company, and portability of those digital assets in between different places
of the metaverse.
And so I think one of the most interesting trends in the metaverse is, in fact, this
idea that we will have portable digital identities, avatars that we can take into different virtual
environments, but also that we can own objects and reuse them in different parts.
And so I think that this emergence of blockchain and NFT and cryptocurrency is very interesting,
because it provides a counterpoint to the imaginary where one company is controlling
everything.
It lets individual content creators create things and then sell those things.
And so it creates a whole economy.
Now, what we have today, which we didn't have in the previous iterations of the metaverse,
if you go back 10, 15 years to Second Life, you know, was that we didn't, one, most people
in our society were not used to being avatars.
Of course, now most younger people today are used to being avatars in games, and are used
to playing with their friends in the same way that, you know, in my case, when I was
a kid, we'd go out to the park and play today, they'll, you know, bring their avatars in
and go into Fortnite or some other digital representation as a way to hang out with their
friends.
But the digital economy didn't really exist in this way.
It was just in a specific company.
And so you could buy, you could create things and sell them for Linden dollars in Second
Life.
You could also have a job.
And there were people who says, I need to be logged in at 11 p.m. because my job is
a bartender.
Yeah, countries opened up.
In a virtual bar.
Sorry, countries opened up embassies in Second Life.
I remember Nike opened up the store in Second Life.
That's right.
Yes.
And so the idea was this was going to be the metaverse, but it was kind of built by one
company and the digital economy, you know, what underpinnings weren't there and not enough
people took it up.
And even Second Life itself ended up introducing open sourced versions of it because, you know,
the power of the crowd is sometimes bigger than the power of a specific company.
But what we have today with blockchain and Bitcoin and Ether and all the other blockchains
that are out there is we have a medium of exchange that is not controlled, you know,
by any central authority.
And I think that is one of the reasons why, you know, governments have been afraid of
Bitcoin and have been afraid of cryptocurrency.
But now, you know, it's just kind of marched on to the point where it's big enough that
it's hard for any one country.
Like even China in 2013, you know, I started buying Bitcoin way back in the day.
I used to go to like the Bank of America and take out one hundred dollars and give the
cash to this other guy who would literally with his phone send me one Bitcoin outside.
But in 2013, China, you know, did one of its many bans on Bitcoin.
It's something that happens every few years now.
And it caused a huge crash in the market.
Now that just happened again.
And it didn't cause such a huge crash in the market because enough people have bought into
this idea of a decentralized medium of economic exchange.
And so I think that's part of why I don't think just one company will end up controlling
the metaverse.
Now, there will be big players, of course, and Facebook wants to be one of those players.
But usually, you know, when the Internet came about, Microsoft tried to crush Netscape and
they did.
They tried to crush Netscape to become the on-ramp of the Internet.
But what happened?
New companies like Google, Facebook and others came to dominate that medium.
That always happens with technology cycles.
So it may not be Facebook and Zuckerberg that we're talking about ten years from now on
the metaverse.
It may just end up being a whole new set of companies that are doing these kind of decentralized
models of virtual ownership and exploring the metaverse.
The second part of the question, if you remember, or you want me to repeat it, because I think
that's something that...
Yeah, why don't you repeat it?
Just how can we possibly ever go on to understand, even recognize the true nature of reality,
which is quantum, based on our binary experience of it?
Yeah, that's a good question, obviously a big metaphysical question, right?
And I believe that a metaphor for the universe of the video game is the best way to understand
it.
And if you go back in history, the models and the metaphors that are used are approximations
of what reality might be like.
In the religious traditions, in Buddhism, for example, the metaphor of the dream is
used quite a bit.
And in fact, the meaning of the word Buddha is to be awake, right?
When somebody asked him, what are you, and he said, I am Buddha, meaning I am awake.
Well, that implies that everybody else is asleep, right?
And so the metaphor is a powerful one, and it's carried through for this idea that the
world is Maya or illusion.
But even to aspects of Tibetan Buddhism, where they have practices of dream yoga, where you
learn to wake up within a dream, what we would call lucid dreaming today as a spiritual practice
to try to understand the nature of reality, that it is all an illusion.
And so that metaphor is very powerful.
But another metaphor that was used back in the day in the Vedas, for example, is this
idea of a stage play or a game play, right?
The lila of the gods, the world is the lila of the gods, and we're all playing roles.
And even Shakespeare 500 years ago used that metaphor when he said all the world's a stage,
and the men and women are merely players.
And then if you go back 100 years, Yogananda, who wrote Autobiography of a Yogi, which is
one of the most popular spiritual books of the 20th century, at least in the West, and
he came over after World War I from India to the US, and he used a more up-to-date,
more modern metaphor.
He used the metaphor of a film reel and projection.
He said, like, seeing all the suffering in World War I, he said, it's like a movie,
you're watching it.
And those are the roles that people are playing.
But I believe if those guys were alive today, they would use a different metaphor.
They would say, it's like an interactive stage play where we all get to make choices, and
we've kind of all agreed to play these roles.
Well, what does that sound like?
It sounds like an interactive video game.
And so that's why I believe this metaphor helps us, because in a video game, we have
this idea of the player and the avatar, right?
And the avatar is represented digitally inside the computer, and you might ask the same question
of the avatar that you're asking, which is, how can we possibly understand the true nature
of reality when everything here is based on bits and digital and binaries, right?
But if we then take this broader metaphor of where there's a player that's outside
of that game that has a consciousness that can remember not just this particular run
of the game, but also the purpose of the game and why they're playing it, and what that
consciousness is.
Now, I can't tell you if that's a physical reality or just pure consciousness.
Now we're into the really metaphysical, you know, worlds of souls and what does it mean
for it to be a soul.
And you know, in Buddhism versus Hinduism, there's even disagreement about this.
Like they both kind of agree that you have these multiple lives, you come in, you play
a role for a period of time, that life ends, you go back and you come back in.
But in one of them, you have an indestructible soul that's going back and forth.
In the other, in Buddhism, it's not quite so clear.
You have what's called a bag of karma, and what is karma anyway?
It's a set of information in the Eastern traditions, right?
And that information gets stored somewhere and it gets used in constructing the world
and the experiences that you have the next time around.
And you can view it as, I like to think of it as a cloud server, right, that contains
all of the information.
And as just in the same way that, you know, if you and I are interacting, data is being
stored up on the cloud.
And so, you know, while I can't answer that question with any certainty, I can say this
is a metaphor that can maybe help us understand how we can understand, you know, the nature
of the world, even though we're dealing in these bits of information.
Definitely hinted at it beautifully.
And it seems like this re-emergence of psychedelics within the mainstream culture is perfectly
timed considering the context that we're dealing with right now.
Yeah, you're right.
So there's a lot of interest in psychedelics again, particularly in therapeutic applications.
But you know, I don't personally don't have a lot of experience with it.
But people who have will tell me, well, they'll see like, you know, graphical lines and grids
and said, well, you can really see the simulation, you know, when you're taking DMT or something
else and that you can start to see that what we think of as physical reality is not quite
the same.
And so it does lead to this question of have we been socialized to see the world a certain
way, right?
Getting back to our original discussion about science and the epistemology, which means
how do you know something?
That's what that term means.
And say, this is the only way we know things.
But do we then, you know, crystallize this point of view over time when we're children?
You know, maybe children who see imaginary friends are not crazy, right?
It's not just imagination.
Maybe they're seeing spirits.
Maybe there are other worlds like Islamic traditions.
You know, we have the jinns who are other types of beings who exist outside of the physical
reality, but also outside of the timeline, you know, and this ties to this other thing,
the Mandela effect, which we can talk about in a minute.
But I think what you're hinting at, it gets back to I think part of the interest in psychedelics
now is to show that our ordinary state of consciousness is not the only state of consciousness
and that there may be systematic ways.
Of course, shamans have known this for, you know, hundreds of years, if not thousands
of years, and the mystical traditions have been telling this all along.
There are ways to perceive these other worlds.
But the interesting thing about psychedelics is that it also is a boundary object, right?
In the same way that I talk about the simulation metaphor, it's something that scientific and
technically minded people can understand.
It's something that religious and mystically oriented people can understand.
This is something that scientists can understand because it's a physical substance, right?
It's not completely outside of the model of reality that chemicals impact consciousness,
right?
And so it's something they can understand, but it's also something that, you know, within
say the South American shamans, it's, you know, known as the gateway to non-ordinary
reality, right?
And so it's also an interesting kind of boundary object.
I mean, there was a Harvard botanist, ethnobotanist named Wade Davis who, you know, explored looking
at different substances.
He wrote a book which was turned into a movie back in the 80s called The Serpent and the
Rainbow.
And, you know, he went to Haiti to explore these idea reports of zombies, right?
And he was trying to figure out what are the compounds that these shamans or voodoo practitioners
used to make somebody appear as if they're dead.
And then when they brought them back to life, that they were a zombie that they could control,
right?
And so, you know, he found the substance that they were using, which was a very complicated
substance consisted of, you know, puffer fish and other things.
But he found that the cultural sets of beliefs around zombies within Haiti in particular
were just as an important part of the physical thing, which was a part of it as well.
And so, you know, I thought that was an interesting case study of different ways of knowing and
thinking about things, you know, and even, you know, somebody who's studying just the
physical part realized that there is an element of how we construct our reality, which is
based on beliefs, etc.
And so, you know, I find psychedelics an interesting boundary object that can be translated either
way.
And like along with simulation theory, maybe one of those things, along with meditation
and stress and yoga, that starts to open up science to this broader reality and very powerful
tools.
And I have a lot of experience with different kinds of variety, but I tell you this, a lot
of people, I think they're going into it with an expectation and a bias.
So they're experiencing in order to proving their bias.
And I think they're missing out a lot of the experience because it's an incredibly powerful
tool but if you go with the idea that you know what enlightenment is and you just want
to experience it, then you're just going to limit yourself and you will have what they
call bad trips.
Because psychedelics, you know, especially in higher dosage, doesn't care what you think
and how you feel, it just shows you what is.
You know, I often describe it as, you know, essence is a water, form is a container.
And what psychedelic does is they puts a crack in a container.
Now certain kind of psychedelics like Bufo, which is five MEO DMT coming from this one
toad out of 7,000 plus amphibian who generates this poison that you can, you know, milk it
and dry it and smoke it.
That outright shatters the container.
So there is no form.
And you know, when people smoke that, they scream and they do things that they can't
even remember it when they're in that state and when they come back, you know, the whole
thing takes like an hour.
You smoke it, you're gone completely somewhere else and in an hour you drive to pick up your
kid from a school and you're perfectly fine after that.
So you know, this just reminds me of a quote by Gore Vidal that keeps coming up in these
recent episodes that we don't even know what our cage looks like because we've never seen
it from the outside.
Right.
Yeah.
No, it makes a lot of sense and like I said, I don't have a lot of personal experience
with it, but in my conversations with people, you know, they've told me about some of the
types of experiences and what they see and it seems very consistent that the ultimate
reality is very different than what we are perceiving, you know, on a day-to-day basis
and there's independent existence of some of these other entities, you know, that are
out there.
So I think it could be a new way, like I said, to really bridge this gap between the materialist
point of view and the mystical point of view.
So let's talk about mandala effect.
It's in the title of your book and it's one of those things that it forms the reality
that we're experiencing, but mostly people completely ignore it that such things exist.
So let's talk a little more about that.
Yeah, sure.
And I will say that I also, you know, kind of ignored it initially when I had first heard
of it and most people have probably heard of it at this point, it's a pretty popular
internet meme out there, but the idea is that there's a subset of people who remember Nelson
Mandela dying in prison in the 80s and some of those people had very specific memories
of watching his funeral, his wife Winnie giving the speech and her taking over leadership
of the political party.
Now the blogger who coined the term the mandala effect in 2010, a blogger named Fiona Broom,
you know, at that point, Mandela was still alive, right?
So what were they remembering that it couldn't have been his funeral, could it?
And so she noticed that there were a whole bunch of other things that people were remembering
differently, ranging from small things like GIF-y peanut butter.
There's no such thing.
There's only GIF to lines in movies such as, you know, in The Empire Strikes Back.
Many of us think Darth Vader said, Luke, I am your father.
But in fact, he said, no, I am your father, you know, going to entire episodes of Star
Trek that people swear they've seen multiple times but don't actually exist to whole movies.
And so, you know, this phenomenon has become interesting and it's sort of an internet phenomenon
in that before that, before the internet was so widely used and we could share things so
easily within social media or Reddit and other places, you know, it would be hard to know
if anybody else had the same experiences that you have.
And so the conventional explanation is, well, that's just faulty memory.
But you know, in this book, I explore the idea of what if, in fact, these people are
remembering an actual timeline as opposed to simply misremembering things because in
some cases, you have what I call higher significance or higher proximity to the specific thing
that we're talking about.
Now, you know, for example, there are groups of people who remember the Reverend Billy
Graham having died and getting magazine articles with this picture on it who are evangelical
Christians.
Now, I wouldn't know, you know, when the Reverend Billy Graham died or if he's even still alive
because I'm not an evangelical Christian.
But for those people for whom that holds the higher significance, they would know.
And there are many, many reports of them saying, well, I remember his funeral years earlier
than he actually died.
And I remember Bill Clinton speaking there and I remember getting these magazine articles.
And so and similarly, there was a YouTube blogger who was a journalism student who went
to South Africa to interview Nelson Mandela in the 80s.
And she was told he's too ill to do the interviews.
So she had to come all the way back from South Africa.
And then, you know, she was working a couple of months later for NPR, I think, in Chicago.
And he died.
Now, how likely is it that somebody who's a journalist, journalism student and becomes
a journalist and goes to see Nelson Mandela is just going to mistake that death for some
other black leader who died in prison back in the 80s?
Right.
Now, I might mistake it or somebody else might mistake it, but they may not.
And so, you know, that's where this whole thing started to get more interesting.
And then you get to physical objects.
Right.
So the physical object of the thinker, you know, the statue, which shows a pose kind
of like this with, you know, kind of a light, light fist underneath the chin.
Well, there are pictures of people standing next to it in the same pose with their clenched
fist on their forehead, which seems really odd when you look at these physical objects.
And there's actually a picture of G.B. Shaw, George Bernard Shaw, in London, just taken
just before the unveiling of the bronze statue, the thinker, one of the bronze statues.
And it says G.B. Shaw in the pose of the thinker.
And he has his hand on his forehead.
And clearly, the thinker doesn't have that.
And so, you know, these things might have more significance or proximity.
If you're standing next to a statue, you have a higher proximity to that than somebody who's
just heard about it or seen pictures online.
But where it really got interesting was in scriptural changes, right?
We've all heard, you know, the quote from Isaiah about the lion will lie with the lamb.
And you know, it turns out that's not there.
If you look at the King James Bible, it says the wolf would lie with the lamb.
And yet, there are many places where they have pictures of the lion and the lamb with
a quote from Isaiah, like physical objects that are left.
And so, you know, some people who track this stuff, again, getting back to significance,
there are people for whom the Bible verses have real significance that they would be
more likely to remember them than somebody who's not into the Bible.
And they track these online.
And my thought was, well, it's probably just a mistranslation, you know, as an old version
of the King James Bible, the new version.
And some of them claim to have the actual physical book from when they were kids.
And they memorized it, but it's changed.
And so now, in the religious world, you know, they think the explanation might be some sort
of, you know, a satanic force or someone is trying to change it.
So that's a different explanation.
But I found this fascinating and said, well, what if, you know, this was really happening?
Could it be explained through quantum mechanics, through computer science, and through the
metaphor of simulation theory where we run things, you know, multiple times?
And it turns out in the Islamic traditions where, you know, there's something called
a hafiz, who's somebody who memorizes the Quran word for word.
I remember thinking when I was a kid, why do they need to memorize the Quran word for
word?
We've got written books, you know, and then now we have computers, so you don't really
need to sit there and spend years memorizing this.
And so there's the Sufi imam who's on record saying, well, one of the reasons why we do
this is because supposedly there are beings outside of time, in this case, jinn, who have
the ability to go back and change variables in the past, you know, and change things,
but they can't change our memories, right?
And so, you know, all of this, and you don't have to believe in the Mandel effect necessarily.
You know, in my book, I say, well, let's do a what if, let's suppose that these people
aren't crazy, they're not just misremembering, and see if we can explain it.
And a lot of this reminded me of the science fiction writer, Philip K. Dick, and he gave
a speech in Metz, France, in 1977, where he said, we are living in a computer programmed
reality and the only clue we have is when some variable is changed, some alteration
is made in our reality.
Now that quote has become kind of famous over the years.
And so I interviewed his wife, Tessa, for my first book, just because I thought it was
kind of a fun way to talk about simulation theory.
And the Wachowskis who created The Matrix were inspired by the writings of Philip K.
Dick.
And, you know, he explored several themes in his science fiction, one of which is what
does it mean to be human, but the second one of which is what is reality, what is real
and what isn't.
And he explored that theme again and again in his books.
And Tessa told me that he came to believe that there were other timelines and that he
had memories of those timelines.
And one of those memories is what resulted in his best received book while he was alive,
The Man in the High Castle, which was about the German and the Japanese winning World
War II.
And he said he remembered that entire timeline moving forward.
But then that timeline got rewound for some reason.
And so, you know, this is quite fascinating because he said at one point all of those
memories came back to him.
And in a process that he used a Greek word called anamnesis, which, you know, means sort
of remembering, but literally it means a loss of forgetfulness.
And you're remembering all these things that you used to know but that you have forgotten.
And so what he was really talking about, I realized, was this idea that you could change
variables and rerun things.
And he said we would have the sense that we were reliving the same events, we were hearing
the same words, we'd have a sense of deja vu.
And such an impression is valid.
And that is a clue that at some point in the past some variable was changed, some alteration
occurred and an alternate reality branched off.
Well, this reminded me a lot of the quantum multiverse explanation that there are multiple
universes with each quantum decision that's made.
And so, you know, that kind of tied together for me.
And then what Philip K. Dick said that's interesting because the Mandela effect hadn't been defined
at the time.
But he also said, well, I remember an alternate present because all we would need to do is
find a subgroup of people that have a memory of a different timeline.
And so, you know, that's what the Mandela effect is.
It's a group of people who remember different variables.
And it's not just one alternate timeline.
There are lots of Mandela effects.
And so, you know, I tried to come up with a framework and actually the framework of
quantum mechanics made sense because it, you know, provides for this thing that I call
the multiverse graph, which is the list of all possibilities.
Getting back to your poem as well, right, that what we think of as time is not what
we think it is, right?
This is about navigating through a particular set of nodes within this graph.
And when we say this didn't happen or that didn't happen, you know, this gets back to
the idea of the life review and near-death experiences as well.
So anyway, that's how, you know, I got into the Mandela effect and that's how it made
its way, you know, into this book, The Simulated Multiverse.
That was awesome.
If this is not convincing people to go and get this book and read it, I don't know what
else would.
This is just so beautifully said and tie everything together.
The book, once again, is called The Simulated Multiverse and MIT Computer Scientists Explore
Parallel Universes, The Simulation Hypothesis, Quantum Computing, and The Mandela Effect.
I tell you this because I grew up in Iran and I went to school there.
One of the reasons people attempted to memorize Quran was because if you could memorize Quran,
you didn't have to go to military service, which was mandatory.
Right, so there's a practical reason, right?
Yep, absolutely.
The social benefits of a certain way of thinking about things, right?
Yeah, but you know, you kind of blew my mind because this is a unique thing about Islam
and Quran that they're saying that even if a vow is changed, it's basically a sin.
It's one of the biggest sins and the person who changed that vow needs to be killed.
So at first, it's very extreme because this is actually a perfect bridge to where I want
to go with how we kind of need to reinterpret a lot of these religious and philosophical
principles for this time.
It is extreme because this is the same approach of the desert people from 1400 years ago,
right?
It's the same thing that they're doing in Afghanistan now and Pakistan and obviously
it's not working in this world, but there are a lot of hints and clues within all of
these things that we can put together in order to reinterpret and maybe upgrade these kind
of perspective.
Let me read you a question that Julio Prisco, I believe you know him.
I told him that I'm going to talk to you and he asked me to ask you this question,
that what should be done to make new religions inspired by science, for example, based on
simulation cosmology, as popular and energizing as traditional religions?
That's an interesting question.
I kind of like to call simulation theory the first new religion of the 21st century, right?
Because we are at a critical point where enough people understand this metaphor of the video
game and that the younger generation spends much more time being avatars within video
games than we ever did before.
So they're very open to this idea that what we think of as reality might be in fact like
Minecraft, right?
Might be in fact like Fortnite.
And so a lot of times people who read my first book, The Simulation Hypothesis, will tell
me, oh, I got into this because my kids asked me, are we living in a simulation?
And so I think that, like I said earlier, simulation theory provides a way to think
about and reinterpret, just like you were saying, some of these older metaphors that
people used.
I mean, if you look, we've been talking about the Islamic traditions a little bit.
If you go back to the Bible and the Koran and that traditions, they talk about the Book
of Life and Judaism and Christianity and the Scroll of Deeds in Islam.
And the Scroll of Deeds is said to be a list, a book, a scroll, something they understood
back then, of every single action that you performed in your life with two angels, the
Kiram and Kitabah, I think they were called, and they actually have names, these angels.
And of course, if we think of that as there are two angels for every person and there's
actually 14 billion angels, I mean, that's an outdated metaphor, right?
And so today in computer science, we use the term daemon for a process that is running
on a computer by itself.
And so if we were to record everything, the metaphor of the book seems old.
We would simply record everything, right?
We would use a video recording, just like we do in Twitch, and to show off our video
gameplay.
I mean, my nephew, when he was like three years old, would say, hey, I want to watch
Star Wars gameplay.
I want to watch that man and that woman playing Star Wars on YouTube, right?
And so it's a recording of the actual gameplay.
And so if we reinterpret, you know, what these religions were saying, I mean, they were using
the metaphors and practices of 1400 or 2000 or 2500 or 5000 years ago into today's terms,
you know, we would use different metaphors.
And so I believe simulation theory is a great metaphor for that.
But also it kind of, I think, will help because if you look at in the US, for example, the
fastest growing religion is not necessarily atheism or Christianity or Islam.
It's the fastest growing designation, sorry, not necessarily religion is spiritual, but
not religious, right?
And so that means people who believe there is more, but who don't find the religious
traditions of the traditional of these religions to be palatable within the modern context.
And what we have to remember is each of these religions were very modernizing at the time.
I mean, they were considered liberal folks who were, you know, literally iconoclast means
the breaking of idols, right?
That's literally what the word means based on, you know, the Prophet Muhammad breaking
the idols in Mecca at the Kaaba, you know, some 1400 years ago.
But the people who created these religions, you know, and even, you know, within Buddhism,
there was a response to the caste system, within Hinduism, and so, you know, they were
kind of upending the social order somewhat when they created these religions.
And so I think, you know, social simulation theory gives us a new way to do that.
And you know, I don't know whether it's going to become an organized religion or not.
That's an interesting question.
I'm following that myself, but I think it certainly could be.
But I think it's even better to think of as a way into religion, into the spiritual but
not religious ideas, right, for the millions and millions of youngsters today who will
be, you know, the leaders of tomorrow.
So I think there is an opportunity to kind of broaden the definition.
And I think young people today, you know, there isn't such a huge, okay, this is science,
this is religion.
They haven't necessarily been indoctrinated into that in the same way.
And so simulation theory gives us, I think, a way to bridge that gap, as I've said before.
Yeah, beautiful.
I think the decentralized nature of it is very appealing to me because my understanding
of this concept of divine is that it's been hijacked by organized religions, and it really
is decentralized, and we are having subjective experiences, and each of our understanding
is a part of it.
And it's not only our understanding as humans, you know, a tree has an experience of the
divine in its own way.
Sea has, you know, its own experience, rock has its own experience.
And mathematically speaking, I was talking to James Lindsay more than a year ago about
this.
And he was like, there are certain numbers that we can write and say your name, but after
a certain amount of numbers, there is there is nothing we can do about it.
We put dot dot dot.
And he said that he called it infinite points that he would, he's an atheist, he would recognize
the validity of an argument for God, quote unquote, God as a placeholder in that dot
dot dot.
So it's something like this simulation theory is a fertile ground basically for the decentralized
subjective experience of the divinity and the divine that is everything and anything
that has any kind of an experience.
Yeah, I think you're right.
It is much more it can be much more decentralized depending on how you view it now.
You know, in my view, I think tends to be what I call the RPG version of simulation
theory.
Simulation theory also sometimes scares people in the religious sense because of what I like
to call the NPC version or the non-player character version in which everyone is just
code on the server.
And people freak out if they if they think of it that way, because then it's like, well,
your life is meaningless.
You're just an AI bot.
But I think that the RPG version, the role playing game version where we are playing
an avatar is the more powerful metaphor and the one that opens up, you know, this ability
because people always say, well, who's outside the simulation?
Is it aliens?
Right.
You mentioned that earlier as well.
Is it time travelers?
Is it, you know, an evil entity that's controlling it?
Is it jinn?
Is it Satan's?
Is it God?
Is it these things?
And say, well, what if it's us?
Right.
So we are outside the simulation and we have on our headsets and we are now we have chosen
to play the game.
We are taking on the challenges in the same way that in a video game you have to have
quests and challenges in order to make the game interesting.
Otherwise, the game is no fun.
And we've agreed to these challenges in our lives.
And so it becomes a different way to think about the challenges of life and to view the
world, but also to open our minds to this greater perspective that might be out there.
So yeah.
I mean, I agree with that.
I think simulation theory can be a doorway to the divide.
Amazing.
The book is called The Simulated Multiverse and MIT Computer Scientists Explores Parallel
Universes, The Simulation Hypothesis, Quantum Computing, and the Mandela Effect.
It's available in Kindle, paperback and audiobook.
Is it available?
It will be available in audiobook soon, but the audiobook has not been released yet, but
yeah, it will be.
Well, Rizwan, thank you so much again for your time and your generosity with your knowledge.
Every time we talk, it's amazing.
So I really do appreciate it.
Let's end this program, this episode, with your message to the world as we are surfing
this exponential curve of technological progress towards a singularity and everything that
is happening with and because of it.
Sure, you know, my advice to the world is, you know, let's not take everything so seriously.
And it's very possible that all of this is a video game and the challenges that we're
going through are challenges that we have chosen to be here.
And that can give us a different perspective in life and the challenges are important in
our lives, you know.
