Like I said, our entire government believes in an afterlife.
No wonder they don't care about transhumanism.
No wonder they don't care about living far longer because they believe there's
an afterlife out there and they're going to be singing with angels as soon as
they die. And, you know, I just, I don't believe that at all.
Hello and welcome to the 39th episode of New Human Podcasts.
I'm Agabahari, an egologist on Twitter and Instagram,
and you can follow the show on liveinlimbo.com, iTunes, and YouTube.
I recently had the opportunity to have a live conversation via Skype with Zoltan
Isfan as part of an event for the Toronto Transhumanist Meetup,
which I also co-organize.
Zoltan has been on the New Human Podcasts before,
and it's always a pleasure to welcome him back.
Okay. So we have with us today Zoltan Isfan,
who most of you should know who he is,
but for the less informed among us, Zoltan, why don't we start with hearing a little
bit about your background, the work you've done and what you're focusing on now
these days, and we'll take it from there.
Sure. Well, I think, if you take a step back,
I began my futurist career in 2013 when I published
my novel, The Transhumanist Wager.
And that book did, I guess, quite well.
And after that, I sort of became a public figure in the movement
and then in the transhumanist movement.
And from there, I sort of just said, well, what can I do to actually help it?
And since I was a journalist, I began writing a ton of articles.
And after that, I said, well, you know, maybe I should run for president
because it's a 2000, you know, the 2016 elections are coming.
And it's a pretty unique opportunity to get my message, the transhumanist
message, out there when everyone's watching.
And so I ran for president under the formation of the Transhumanist Party.
And lo and behold, the campaign did very, very well.
It was very, very visible.
And I did that for over two years.
And it did so well that, of course, I didn't win.
I did so well, but that I thought I'd run for governor.
Now of California, I'm running as a libertarian this time, instead of
as under the Transhumanist Party, but of course, I'm still running
a transhumanist platform.
So that sort of brings everyone up to speed, I guess, to how this happened.
But a lot of it began with the novel I published called The Transhumanist Wager.
Yeah, we're going to talk about your run as a governor, but I want to ask you,
since you ran as a presidential candidate in the Shet Show, that was
presidential campaign of 2016, and you went across the country and talked to
many different people from different backgrounds.
Why don't you tell us what is happening in America?
Because a lot of people are just amazed and surprised and confused.
And what is the forecast, in your opinion?
What's coming?
Well, you mean what is coming politically or what is coming in the transhumanist world?
Why isn't a transhumanist world depend or depend directly to what's happening politically?
Well, I'm not optimistic at the moment because I feel with Republican and
Congress in the executive branch, we have a potential problem, because, let's be honest,
conservatives generally will hold back technology more than other types of politicians will.
And that presents a problem because, for example, Mike Pence has already expressed some,
at least that I've heard, some angst at genetic editing, and genetic editing is potentially
the most important transhumanist and science of the 21st century.
So if we have conservatives in government that want to hold back stuff like that, then
we're in very big trouble.
On the other hand, I think generally Trump will be okay for science because he's a capitalist.
And it is capitalism that moves forward science.
The problem, though, is really, does only some parts move forward?
Like AI seems to be moving forward, but if genetic editing doesn't go forward, then maybe
we don't get the longevity that I want.
Instead, we get only the technology.
So these are some of the worries that I have.
I mean, ultimately, it would have been better to just have somebody who was very pro-science
and pro-capitalism, I think, when you talk about the long-term ramifications of transhumanism.
Maybe capitalism can survive and be on 10 or 20 more years.
But the question was to try to answer the environment today.
The reason, you know, I'm not a Trump supporter, just everybody knows that.
But the NASDAQ and the stock markets have been hitting new highs.
People are optimistic about money filtering into the companies like Google and Apple and
other companies that make the technology.
It is an environment that a lot of stuff can come out.
That said, if we get into a position where all of a sudden fascism takes over or, you
know, people like Mike Pence, the vice president, really want to hold back science, then we
could be in for a very terrible scenario.
It's not unfolding like I wanted, but right now we're still doing okay.
But there are plenty of things to worry about in the horizon.
A lot of challenges, yeah.
You said that you're still running on a transhumanist platform.
So please explain what is a transhumanist platform that you're running on and why are
you running as a libertarian in a solid Democrat state?
What are you trying to achieve?
Well, you know, to be honest, I'm a left-leaning libertarian.
I've been very honest about that from the beginning.
I support a universal basic income and I support a lot of the policies of the Democratic Party.
However, I'm also quite libertarian in many ways.
And I just felt like I had a better chance of making a real impact in the California
gubernatorial race as a libertarian.
I mean, after all, there's already like 10 other candidates that are running as Democrats.
And frankly, some of them are, you know, seasoned politicians.
Whereas, you know, by coming in as a libertarian, I came in as sort of the leader of the pack.
And that was a great, from a point of view of making an impact, that's really important.
I think, though, a transhumanist platform, where my platform becomes quite different,
is that I'm, you know, a number one goal of mine is still longevity.
And it's also very much healthcare.
Even though I don't support a universal healthcare, I support a universal basic income
with the idea that all this extra money can pay so everybody has healthcare.
And I just feel like it's the right of the nation and the right of the citizenry
to fight for its own people's longevity.
And this is something that's, you know, very, very important to me.
I'm not going to give that up just because, you know, as a libertarian,
I'm not supposed to want government in everybody's, you know, plates and bedrooms or whatever.
I don't want that.
But at the same time, I do feel very strongly that a national agenda should be longevity.
A national agenda should be moving the species forward
and making people's lives better through science and technology.
Yeah, longevity has been on one of the premier policies that you've been following.
What steps have you taken to make aging to be recognized as a disease?
And what are the obstacles and opportunities ahead of us?
Well, and that's the number one thing. In my opinion,
you really need to make aging recognized as a disease
because otherwise there's zero funding for it.
I mean, right now the amount of funding that is going into,
from the NIH, National Institute of Health,
you know, which gives the billions and billions of dollars,
is just not giving much money to people.
Not to researchers, not to universities, not to corporations,
because anti-aging is somewhat against government policy.
You have to understand, in America, 535 members of Congress,
all nine Supreme Court justices and our president and vice president, are religious.
They believe in an afterlife.
So they're not going to take government money
and say, let's put it towards something that wants everybody to live, you know, forever,
or at least thousands of years.
That's just sort of anti-religious.
What's important, though, is what I'm trying to do is change the culture.
If you can classify aging as a disease,
then all of a sudden funding will fund from the government,
and also culture will start changing.
People may elect politicians that are more interested in
practices that would make people live a lot longer and maybe even overcome death.
You have to be careful, because like I said,
right now 100% of our government, at least on paper, says they believe in an afterlife.
And when I talk about ending death, that's very,
that's sort of like changing the institution entirely.
And that's exactly what I was going to ask you.
Do we have a problem with the foundation of a political system
that we have in the United States, which is corrupted, very slow,
and as you said, extremely religious?
I remember you were telling me you were going to the South,
and everybody were saying you have a chip in your hand,
so this is a mark of the beast, you're anti-Christ, and all of,
like what, how are we going to change those people who, you know,
voted for Trump when he stood up there and said,
I know the system best, so I'm the only one who can change it,
and he got all those votes.
How are we going to tell them that, hey, you don't need to die,
and you don't need to go to heaven and hell, and Jesus might be good for you,
but don't shove it down our throats.
How are we going to get there?
It seems to just go a very long, long, far, far away.
Well, one thing I think we just got to wait it out,
because it does seem like a lot of millennials are far less religious.
And I also think we need to fight back, and we have to fight back with technology.
It's a lot harder to justify Christianity in the technological age
or in the machine age.
Questions like, should artificial intelligence believe in Jesus?
That's such an absurd question.
As soon as you start thinking about that question,
you realize how ridiculous religion is.
And these are the things that technology might actually make
the religious question obsolete to some extent.
Now, I'm not saying that people shouldn't be religious.
What I'm just saying, though, is the fundamentalism has to change.
They need to stop going, you know, if they want to believe in Jesus
as some kind of overriding spiritual power.
Because even I must say, you know, even though I say I'm an atheist,
if you really ask me downright, do I know if there's an afterlife or not,
I don't know. Come on.
I mean, I'm not that smart. Nobody's that smart.
Anyone that says they do is honestly lying.
But the reality is I could accept a much bigger version of God,
but I can't accept one that follows a Bible word for word,
phrase for phrase, and then takes those phrases and applies them to government.
This is insane to me.
This is when we need, you know, the scientific method is what I base
my campaign on, what I base all my philosophies on,
is proving these ideas again and again.
And if an idea proves very useful, you can use it.
But at some point, you have to be understanding that it might not be useful,
and then it's time to upgrade that idea.
That's how a humble person does it, a normal person does it.
If something's wrong, they fix it.
A virgin can be wrong. It's not like we got everything right.
Maybe there is a God. I'll be the first to say that.
But to pinpoint it down on some Judeo-Christian person with a red beard
or long hair and, you know, says that you can only be forgiven your sins
and go through Christ to reach heaven,
this is not a system I want to teach my children.
It's not a system I want to live in.
So we have to fight against that and rail against that with media,
you know, what you're doing today with your podcast.
I mean, these are the kinds of things that make a difference.
And we're winning. Don't for a second think we're not.
When you look at the younger generation,
there's never been so much lack of religiosity in this nation,
and already 50% of Europe is atheism.
So we're winning.
There's no question that, you know, secularism to some extent is winning.
And it may not be secularism. It just might be less fundamentalism.
So I'm encouraged, but it's going to be 20 or 30 years
before we really start to see some real progress.
That's still, I think, a pretty optimistic timeframe.
I'm going to ask you the question that David McPherson wanted to ask you,
but I'm going to also mention, because you quite correctly, I think,
brought up how absurd Christian transhumanism is.
And I've had Lincoln Cannon from Mormon Transhumanist Association
and Christopher Benwick from the Christian Transhumanist Association,
both on the podcast.
And to me, it seems like they're using transhumanism
to justify their religious belief.
But one thing that they do have in common is that they both,
and James Hughes is not the person I talked to,
they all are against you to run as a transhumanist figure, as I'm sure you know.
So David McPherson is asking, with that in mind,
why do you think you're such a polarizing figure within the transhumanist community?
I'm not a big fan of talking about, I guess, myself and this conflict,
but I'll just try to be honest.
But this is a community, right?
If these people in the community are just throwing rocks on your way,
why do you think that is?
I don't know. It's a bummer, too, because I feel like we're all in this for longevity.
That's one of the cruxes of the situation of our community,
is that we all don't want to die.
When people get in the way of other people,
everyone says, oh, I damaged the movement,
but I made the movement quite large because I was sort of the sole mainstream journalist.
I put out 200 articles almost in the last three years in huge places,
Gizmodo, VICE, Newsweek, Wired.
It went around the world.
I was just looking yesterday at one of my new videos,
or the videos from the last week.
In two weeks, it went up from 14 million views to 16 million views.
You have to understand that's more traffic than Humanity Plus gets in an entire 365 days,
what I often get in a day or two now.
Are they just jealous?
I don't know.
What I think is, honestly, there has never been a journalist in the movement,
and I appeared and all of a sudden,
journalists have a way of making things happen in a different way.
We have an amazing amount of scientists.
We have an amazing amount of engineers, an amazing amount of technologists,
but we also need popularizers.
We need provocateurs.
We need people that actually go out there with a coffin bus
and drive around and spread it to those people in the South
who really don't want to hear it.
Then you get those people in the South,
put you on Infowars and all this other crazy stuff.
In the meantime, what happens is it starts building,
and you get recognition.
Now, the recognition may not be good at first,
but a lot of the recognition will never be good.
To the Trump people, Hillary was never a good person.
It's going to be polarizing no matter how it goes.
I think what's important, though, is the recognition.
If you hear the word transhumanism enough times,
and you hear that science and technology can defeat death,
you start to believe in it or you start to hate it.
Whatever it is, at least it invokes a kind of a reaction.
I guess my coming on the scene and doing that so dramatically
really got a lot of people upset.
Maybe it was jealousy. Maybe it was just, I don't know,
maybe they didn't like my sense. I don't know.
It's hard to know exactly why,
but obviously I caused a big hoo-ha in the whole community.
I think it's jealousy, but we'll see.
I don't like to say that just because I'm not sure
what there's really to be jealous of.
It's like we're all going to live longer,
and the movement has grown into something
that's almost mainstream now.
I see the New York Times using the word transhumanism.
They don't even think about it anymore.
This is now a real movement.
What they're saying basically is that because of your book,
I think that you want to become a totalitarian,
transhumanist king who wants to chip everyone,
because you also mentioned about refugees from Syria.
It's one of the ways they can control it.
I don't know if anyone's ever read the ending of the book,
but the totalitarian king gives back the entire world
to a free, democratic environment
and goes to live in the woods and writes philosophy.
In many ways, that's what a strong armed leader would do.
A strong armed CEO will sometimes do that.
He creates a company, he's done what he needs to do,
and then he leaves.
In the meantime, everybody's gained a whole bunch more freedoms.
Sometimes it does, and this is just the novel I'm speaking of,
but I think sometimes it's okay to push those extra boundaries.
That's how change occurs.
I just want to point out that the guy in the book
ends up not being a totalitarian king,
but just a humble philosopher who willingly, openly gave
the world back to the world.
Yeah, they just make whatever they want out of it
the same way they're doing the Bible.
For the records, you told me, I spoke to you about a year ago,
and you told me that you're going to step down
from transhumanist party leadership
and just give it to the community,
and that's exactly what you did,
because you're not necessarily part of transhumanist leadership,
transhumanist party leadership anymore, right?
Yeah, yeah, no, I'm not.
I'm an advisor to the transhumanist party,
and I still strongly believe in it,
and maybe I'll try to help at all times,
but maybe I'll take a leadership role in the future.
I don't know, but right now I handed it over
to Gennady Stolerov, and he's done an excellent job,
and I think he democratized it.
He did a better job democratizing it than I did.
That's okay to say,
and I like a lot of the new policies that have gone on.
The problem, though, is that right now
we're still trying to build the party,
it's still quite small,
it's not getting the same amount of media attention,
and so there were some trade-offs,
but I'm happy to see that the transhumanist party continues,
and I'm a firm believer
that it's a very needed political institution out there
that can actually play a real role in history,
maybe not in the next two years or four years,
but certainly in the next decade or two decades.
Right, I agree.
Let's talk about unemployment,
which is a big subject in the past campaign.
Trump blamed, not refugees,
but illegal immigrants
and people who are working and taking jobs away from Americans,
but the reality is a lot of those jobs are not coming back
due to automation,
but nobody really talked about automation.
So do you think over the next two, three years,
when Trump won't be able to deliver the number of jobs
and the increase in economy that he has promised,
the attention will be shift towards technology
and automation as the main scapegoat?
Yeah, look, Trump, I'm not saying Trump lied,
maybe he just didn't know, but the bottom line, he was wrong.
I mean, this was never about immigrants.
It was crazy to name immigrants as the issue.
I mean, certainly that's something that, like,
when you had outsourcing of jobs a long time ago
to Asia and place Mexico and whatnot,
that made a lot of sense.
Like, you could see the jobs going,
but this time around, it really didn't have to do with immigrants.
If you just followed the numbers, you would say, wow,
I mean, jobs are being replaced because technology is increasing,
and it's not increasing in certain, like, just in agriculture
or just in healthcare.
It's increasing every single field of the economy that we have.
It's really easy for any CEO to see that technology is replacing workers,
and that's going to become so pronounced.
Like, every single day, another day goes by, that increases.
And at some point, people are going to wake up in four years,
or probably in 2020, and say,
wow, we have a massive problem in our hands,
and building a wall is not going to solve the situation.
The situation is going to be solved by a sort of
post-capitalistic type of environment,
which probably is going to involve a universal basic income of some sorts,
which, of course, I support.
There's no way that we're going to continue
when 4 million truck drivers lose their jobs,
when nurses lose their jobs due to robots, when lawyers lose...
I mean, the whole system's changing, the entire system.
And we can't just all be artists.
I mean, maybe we can be,
but I don't think we can feed ourselves all as artists.
So we're going to have to do something.
And I have a bunch of different policies, including the newest one,
which is the federal land dividend,
which takes some of the federal land and tries to monetize it.
But the bottom line is, however we do it, we're going to need it.
Otherwise, people are going to riot.
And the people that are going to riot are the Trump supporters,
because a lot of them are some of the very first ones in line
to not only lose their job,
but just never be able to get another job again.
So let's talk a little about UBI more in depth.
Where does the money for UBI come from?
And I want you to expand on federal land dividend as a funding source of it.
And is there any other alternative other than UBI?
Because some people are not very happy about UBI either.
Real quickly, there are other alternatives.
I mean, government can get everybody a job that they wanted,
but it's the same sort of system.
I guess you might be able to use some kind of blockchain technology
to give certain types of money,
and that could produce some kind of income.
The other thing, I mean, there are a couple different ways of doing it,
but the bottom line is all those are so, in my mind, not really,
there's a negative land tax system.
In my mind, the very simplest thing to do is to understand a very basic concept,
which is 50% of Americans are already on some government support.
To increase that to 100% is not as far as a lot of people think.
It doesn't have to be a huge amount to begin with.
It can only be something that supplements our income,
gives people a little bit of a floor.
But in my opinion, there's two ways to do it,
and that's going to be to raise taxes, or you could maybe tax the robots, whatever.
It's almost the same thing.
Or what I would suggest doing is my federal land dividend,
which Canada probably has the same situation, maybe even more so,
where we have $150 trillion worth of federal land available in America right now
that's basically untouched or unused.
Our national debt is around $20 trillion or a little bit more.
So we have six times the national debt of land sitting out there,
unoccupied resources, minerals, even fisheries and things like that.
People don't want to touch that because they call it nature.
They want to save it for a thousand years into the future
when their great-great-great-great-grandkids are here.
And I understand that thinking until we got to the transhumanist age,
when I have to ask myself is, A, will America survive beyond the next 20 or 30 years
through a singularity? Will we even be humans?
Will we appreciate land in the same way we do when we live in virtual reality environments
where we're leaving planet Earth to go to other?
There's a whole bunch of reasons that thinking a thousand years in the future
isn't very rational anymore.
However, we have 45 million people living in poverty in America today,
many of them who are hungry.
About 15 million children go to Hungary every night in America.
This is something that we can deal with today if we took that $150 trillion worth
of federal land and started to monetize it.
Now, the problem with that idea is, and this is huge, just to give you an idea,
we have 45 million unused acres in California.
That's almost half of California is essentially unused land.
And yes, California is beautiful and nobody wants to build a mall on Yosemite.
I've heard all the arguments.
But at the same time, there are so many poor people in California.
About 40% of Californians live with an income that is less than $24,000.
So that is a very significant problem.
We have to essentially create some kind of income so that those people can get out of poverty.
Well, if we monetize that land out there, that 45 million acres,
whether it's forestry, whether it's minerals, whether it's even just tourism,
we could start paying those 19 million Californians just in California alone,
19 million Californians who live in poverty or who live very near the poverty line.
$24,000 for a household is a very small amount, I have to be honest.
I'm not sure what the Canadian dollar is like,
but if a household in poverty in California only has $24,000 of income,
I can't even see how they could survive anywhere near the Bay Area that I live in.
There's no way to feed yourself on that.
So we need to do something.
And this system that I've devised running for governor worked really good in California,
it can also be applied nationally and even better, it can be applied globally
because many governments are sitting on huge untapped resources.
And the best thing about the plan is it's bipartisan.
I don't try to create plans that like, you know, I mean, I've heard all the things,
give the land all back to the people, it'll be fine.
You know, the reality is the rich people, the conservatives and whatnot,
most of them are in charge, they run the corporations.
But if you want to give them something so that they will say,
you know what, a basic income makes sense,
give them more business opportunity and just say, we just want to be covered.
That's the system that's bipartisan that maybe you might actually be able
to get through Congress someday between both the Democrats and the Republicans.
So this is my way of doing that.
Have you had any conversation with members of either of the parties
about your approach to this problem?
And have you found any kind of alliance in either of the parties?
And if so, which party you found to be more in line with what you're talking about?
Well, it's very tough.
The answer, the short answer is no.
The Democrats...
No, you haven't talked to them or you haven't found any alliance?
Well, I've tried and haven't found any alliances.
I do have friends in parties.
They're not really necessarily that high up.
But, you know, I wouldn't be surprised if Bernie Sanders begins to support
a basic income of some sort coming soon,
maybe in 2018 or certainly in 2020 if he considers another run.
I know that there's certain kind of sympathies there.
But has anyone actually said yea or nay? No.
Right now, it seems the Democrats are too worried about the environmental consequences.
And the Republicans are saying,
well, why don't we just use the federal land and just let the country become richer?
Do we really need to give it back to the poor?
But the thing you have to understand about $150 trillion worth of federal land
is that if you divide that by about 300 million Americans,
that's a half million dollars each.
Every single American individual basically in America should have
approximately a half million dollar net worth.
So this is a lot of money.
I mean, over 50% of Americans don't have a net worth over $10,000.
So when you talk about giving them a half million,
you're talking about making their net worth 50 times what it is essentially.
I mean, it's a dramatic change.
We're talking about eliminating poverty.
So all the parties are interested in it.
And I've had some major things.
I mean, now this future will have a major video out on it today or tomorrow.
The Times of London did a big story where I was involved.
It hasn't come out yet.
But there's been quite a few things written about it.
And I think it's going to continue growing.
I was talking with HBO about it as well.
But whether it's something that could be implemented,
it's so tough in government.
It takes forever to get these things through.
Well, it's amazing to get rid of poverty.
But the reality is that the current system in the U.S. seems to be extremely corrupt
and extremely, as you said, religious and conservative.
What everyday individual can do to change the system?
Because the way I see it, the Constitution itself,
it starts with saying, we the people, right?
So people as this human people?
Or are we talking about transhumans as people as well?
So all these changes that you're following at some point
will hit a brick wall because of the Constitution.
So how can regular individuals, what can they do?
And how can they approach this subject that will affect all of us
in order to change the entire system fundamentally,
which is absolutely needed?
I mean, why should we be limited to a piece of document
that's been written by feathers before discovery of electricity?
Yes.
No, I couldn't agree with you more.
In my opinion, I've said this before,
rewriting the Constitution is mandatory.
People in the Libertarian Party get very upset when I say that,
but I don't think they quite understand.
Without rewriting the rules,
the rules applied when America was a tiny nation,
and there wasn't all this great technology.
But now we have so many third parties, lobbyists,
things that are creating corruption,
I think it's absolutely imperative that we create a new system.
It's okay to rewrite something.
It's okay to say we can do better than we did two or 300 years ago.
The question was asked that how do you monetize land?
The monetizing thing is one of the most difficult questions,
and this is where it really takes a lot of analysts and a lot of advisors
that I'm kind of working on recruiting.
For example, California, let's just stay with California
as a good example right now,
has an amazing amount of coastal land that has never been developed
because the Coastal Commission in California is incredibly tight.
Now, they've done a wonderful job protecting California to such a point
that you can literally drive up and down the coast
and not see houses for hours on end most times in many places.
And while this is great,
the fact of the matter is that the land overlooking the ocean
for miles and miles and miles is worth trillions of dollars alone.
I mean, we could take out 20%, 30% probably of the national debt
just with the coastal land in California
if we were to develop it and have people live there.
But that's one way to monetize it.
But then, of course, the environmental groups bring up other good problems.
Okay, fine.
In a year where California has enough water, that works fine.
But what about the years when California has a drought?
So it's complicated.
It's not as easy as just say, okay, go to Exxon
and go take over that five million acres of that forest
and do what you want to it.
In my leasing project, I never say...
When I talk about monetizing federal land,
I never want to give land away or sell it.
I only talk about leasing land.
So in my case, I would say to the forestry industry,
we're going to give you five million acres of California timber,
but in 25 years, you need to regrow it
and return it to exactly the same state it was.
And that's the only conditions that you can lease that land from us.
And you're never going to own it.
And should they default on that,
then we would take over their companies or something like that.
My plan only allows for leasing.
And it also doesn't touch national parks.
I made a comment about Yosemite earlier
because everybody loves to joke about it when talking about this,
but I would never touch national parks.
Most of this land is, of course, not national parks of the federal land.
So, you know, Nevada, for example,
has some people say almost as many resources as Afghanistan
when it concerns minerals.
Now, we've been fighting trillion-dollar war in Afghanistan
for a long time or at least, you know, protecting our interests.
And you can say it's for the people, and I wish it was,
but I don't really believe it is.
I think it's for the mineral rights.
Nevada is about 96% unoccupied, meaning most of the land is just empty,
and we have huge mineral resources.
When is the American government going to take those resources
and use them for something that is actually applicable in today's world,
especially fighting poverty?
I mean, do they really think we're going to be sitting here
in human flesh in 100 years?
No, man, we're going to be something probably very different in 100 years.
We have people starting to, to some extent,
merge with machines, driverless cars.
As soon as we're going to come five, 10 years,
a bionic arm is going to be better than an arm of flesh.
And, of course, Elon Musk is working on the neural lace
along with other people, too, like the company colonel.
The age of machines and merging with them is upon us.
In 15 or 20 years, I don't expect really to be that human anymore.
And what I'm trying to say is holding onto resources that we have
and not just trying to give them to the highest bidder,
at least in a leasing form, is crazy.
And we're going to have nanotechnology,
and we're going to have genetic engineering,
we're going to have bioengineering,
this great idea that you can control the weather and control nature.
You know, China is already experimenting with controlling their weather,
seeding the clouds with things so they can, you know,
you can make rainstorms in Los Angeles when you need rain.
The point is this is all right here.
It's either happening or coming in the next five or 10 or 15 years.
To sit on resources for some thousand-year future is insane to me.
We have people that are hungry.
We have people that have no education.
We have people that have no health care.
And they need these resources now.
And honestly, it fundamentally belongs to them.
It belongs to the people.
So however we monetize it, we should monetize it.
And, you know, I don't want to say let it be a free-for-all,
because I don't want to ruin the Earth.
I love the pristine beauty of the Earth, and I want to return to what it is.
But I also don't want to see hungry children.
That's unacceptable in America and elsewhere.
And you see this monetization being done by the states,
not the federal government, right?
I think at first it would be best done by the states.
I think states would have to decide if that's something that they want to do.
But let's, you know, I think the strange thing here is that it's really only
the western part of the United States that has massive amounts of federal resources.
So at some point, it was a good experiment in California.
It's an easy experiment.
It's pretty certain to work here.
It wouldn't work in Massachusetts or something or New York,
because it doesn't have that many resources.
And at some point, if you want to take this on a national level,
which I think would be very important, then you would, you know,
California would have to pay its share to the federal government.
And that doesn't sit well as a California governor.
But, you know, I'm also running on a national platform.
I plan to run for the presidency again.
I'm not sure when, but, you know, this will be a significant platform of mine.
We are facing this age of automation.
It's not going away.
This is the question of our time.
And I can tell you that if 30 or 40 percent of the workforce becomes unemployed
and we can't pay them, they're going to pick up their guns and riot.
And this could be the dystopia that, you know, I don't know, whoever was creating.
But I don't want to see that.
I don't want to be responsible for that.
Right.
I want to ask you about what are your plans for security,
national security and cybersecurity?
I mentioned briefly that one of the suggestions that you had was to chip
the Syrian refugees that are coming.
The reality is that we're dealing with terrorism on a daily basis.
And it seems like a portion of the West being the far-left regressive liberals,
whatever you want to call them, they're not even acknowledging the real problem.
Are you acknowledging the real problem?
And what are the solutions to deal with security based on the subject of terror
and cybersecurity?
Sure.
And let me just clarify real quickly about the Syrian refugee chipping.
I'm a former war zone journalist who has been to war zones.
And I didn't say that because I actually wanted to chip refugees.
I actually wouldn't do that if I had an open say.
I would just let a lot of people in and not say anything
because I have a kind of an open border policy.
But my solution was bipartisan.
I was saying, you know, neither the Democrats nor the conservatives
want these people in, but is there any set of circumstances
where they would want them in?
And let's say chipping was a way we can monitor them.
Well, now you're solving a humanitarian crisis while resting with a lot more
security because you can follow these people through a central mainframe.
And that was really that idea about chipping Syrian refugees.
It wasn't something that I wanted to do.
What I want to do is having been to war zones, seeing, you know,
let's say 300,000 people have already died.
What's important to me is saving lives.
You know, as a transhumanist and a longevity activist,
I don't believe in letting lives go.
And there are methods, and those methods might seem totalitarian by nature,
but it was not to keep them chipped forever.
It was just like three years we let you in because your country's been destroyed
by a dictator or whatever, and all of a sudden, you know,
if you show you can produce and, you know, join the workforce
or do whatever you're going to do here, then all of a sudden it's like,
yeah, take your chip out and you're free to stay.
And this was a humanitarian thing to save lives.
And I broadly think that that's a good policy with immigration as well.
I don't think that anyone should have free rein to just come into America
because what if they don't do good things?
However, I want to invite everyone in, and I want them to make America
stronger and stronger and stronger.
So what are some methods of making sure that they can do that?
Well, there might be some technological methods like chipping
or just heightened security or things like that that you can give immigrants here.
I mean, let's be honest, the country was built on a strong immigrant population.
I'm the son of an immigrant.
And, you know, people came here wanting to live this American dream.
I still believe broadly they do, but we just need to maybe use technology
to make that a little bit more excessive, a little bit more so that the conservatives
and the Democrats can swallow that without freaking out.
And I think, you know, chipping technology is something that's great.
I have a chip. It doesn't bother me, doesn't scare me.
I use it for a lot of things.
I think everyone's going to have one in the future.
You know, what's the difference between a chip and a cell phone?
Honestly, it's just not that big of a difference except one's tiny.
And we're all being tracked by our cell phones already,
whether they want to admit it or not.
Facebook is tracking us.
Skype is tracking this call for sure on my tablet.
You know, all these different things are already happening.
So I think the idea of privacy we might have to get over for the better benefit of security.
What are we trying to hide from?
I mean, I don't know.
I mean, maybe it's like let everyone have as many guns as they want.
Let everyone also be completely, you know, watch what they're doing.
For me, I don't really understand why we're trying to retain privacy and retain rights.
If we're going to live in a very public world with all this digital technology,
we'd be safer to just be totally honest with ourselves and let a lot of our lives just be as it is,
which is incredibly visible, incredibly trackable.
And if we just allowed a bit more of that, I think life would get a lot more safe.
And don't get me wrong, when it concerns government,
more than ever I think President Trump should be wearing a thing
that shows exactly where he is at every single moment.
I think we should see all his discussions.
Every single Congress, every single senator, every single politician should have something.
If you want to be a public person, you should be on camera all the time.
We should know exactly what you're doing.
No backroom deals.
We know you're lobbying.
We hear that. We get you.
This is the kind of society that I think is actually a lot more acceptable
than the society where we all fight for our privacy and then we have bad things happen.
Full transparency for everyone so nobody's basically missing out on it.
Yes. And I think what people have to understand is we're moving towards a full transparent society.
Whether we like it or not, this is happening.
And you can fight it all you want.
This is why as a libertarian it works very well to have a fully transparent society
because then you have rights to everything you want to do, whatever it is you want to do.
But you're also going to be, you know, the public can see you.
People can know where you are.
It sounds crazy, but it's a very libertarian-esque idea I think at the core of it.
Yeah. It sounds very similar to what Eric Schmidt said,
that if you're doing something that you don't want anybody else to know,
maybe you shouldn't be doing that thing.
I'm going to ask two more questions.
The first one is from Luna Yeltsma.
I hope that I haven't bastardized the name.
He or she is asking, how do you see the concept of money and value evolve in the coming years and decades?
And then I want to ask you because every time me and my friends are talking about policies of either of the parties,
we get to the result that you have to follow the money and see who is funding them.
Who is funding you?
Are you asking me who's funding me?
Sure.
Well, I mean, I fund myself.
I haven't taken donations from my governor run at all yet.
It's entirely self-funded, your libertarian campaign and transhumanist campaign.
Yes, so far entirely self-funded.
We did take money for the transhumist party, but we never, this is embarrassing,
we never even collected more than $5,000 over a two-year haul.
The bus, though, the bus somebody we did, we had a kickstarter and that bus was for $27,000.
But the bus was different because it paid for the bus and it paid for the food and the gas,
the gas, for example, which was $7,000 to cross the country.
So, yeah, nobody pays for my own political campaign, so at least not yet.
I'd like to.
I'm actually working on trying to see if the governor campaign can be quite different.
I'm trying to work out managers and things like that.
It really requires money up front.
And then it'll be a very different question if you ask me this after I've done that.
Because right now I can say anything I want.
Party leadership, the libertarian party leadership came and told me already,
be careful with the basic income, it's not our platform.
And, you know, they warned me about it.
But, you know, because I'm not beholden to anyone, I can kind of put those things forward.
I do think, though, and I've said this before in my presidential run,
I had no funding whatsoever, I just funded it myself,
that we should either, it's okay to allow all money to go in the system,
but if you're going to allow third-party candidates,
maybe the government should have some kind of system that can promote some of the top third-party candidates
to make sure that they have an equal playing field.
It's in the best interest of the American people that the third-party candidates can be competitive
against some of the top candidates who are working for all the corporations and getting all the lobbying money.
And, you know, that just sounds fair to me.
And even though I don't want government support,
in the end of the day, if that's what makes it fair, that makes it fair.
And if you can briefly answer Luna's question,
how do you see the concept of money and value evolve in the coming years and decades?
So it's very interesting watching what's happening with Bitcoin right now,
you know, it's exploding on the market and whatnot, but whether it will continue to do so
and become the currency of choice is a very, you know, that's a different game.
I've often speculated, you know, what could be the real foundation of money in the future.
I've often wondered, in fact, if DNA will end up as something like the real money of the future,
or some kind of, maybe not DNA, maybe it's actually software or coding.
It depends on what you're interested in.
But the real future of money is that we're probably going to continue living underneath
the American dollar, the whole world, for the next 10 or 20 years,
unless some kind of electronic currency can become really powerful.
But I think at some point, people might even try to tag the dollar to something electronic.
And things will be so transparent,
like Bitcoin will just transfer really into dollars and dollars into other things.
We're not even sure that there will be one central currency.
Value will always still be there, just very quick exchange rates.
I have advocated for a central currency in my book and elsewhere,
because I thought a single language and a single currency help bond people.
But I'm not sure that that's actually ever going to happen,
just given how fast technology changes and transfers just so instantaneous.
It's crazy how quickly you can go get anything now.
Right. And to conclude our conversation, Zoltan,
then it's a proven fact that any innovation or development work
as good as a society that adapts that development and innovation.
How do you see us doing as a society?
How good of a job are we doing adapting to new changes
and educating ourselves about new changes?
And what additional steps we can take just to catch up with the changes
that are happening on a daily basis now?
Yeah, we're sorry, but we're doing awful. We're terrible.
It's amazing how backwards of a system we lived in.
When I told you that 535 Congress members,
nine Supreme Court justices, president, vice president,
all believe in an afterlife, what I'm really saying is, are we kidding us?
I mean, is this insane? This is truly insane.
Now, if they all said, oh, well, you know, I have a broader definition of spirituality,
I'd say fine. But we're talking like at least 95% of them would say
something fundamental when it comes to religion or something like that.
We live in a system that nobody wants to change
because the power that they gathered was based on stepping on that system
and preserving that system.
And that's part of the reason how, you know, they got that power in the first place.
I talk a lot about this in my book called baggage culture,
where we carry our baggage with us everywhere.
And sometimes the one who carries the most baggage
actually ends up being the strongest person
because he has the best amount of suitcases of baggage to step on.
It's a sad story, whereas innovation, you have to struggle and fight.
And you see someone even like me who comes into the movement with some new ideas
even gets bashed in what's supposed to be a very progressive,
very forward-thinking movement.
So I'm very disappointed with how society is moving forward.
And I wouldn't be surprised if something awful happens,
either I'm pretty amazed right now that there hasn't been a terrible nuclear outbreak of some sort
or whether it's a virus, something that takes out something or something else.
You know, I mean, there are so many people out there that to me seem totally insane.
And I'm amazed that more of them don't do bad things to harm society and harm the world.
And I think a lot of it comes from the fact that we're not adjusting
to how fast technology is progressing.
And at some point, it's just going to leave us totally behind.
You know, when inequality grows, that's a problem.
It's growing because nobody can keep up.
We need to make sure that all the levels of the population stay in harmony and work together.
And that democracy is something that we don't have just because it makes sense or because it's useful.
We have it because we don't want to face the alternative of democracy.
And unless you've been to war zones, you forget what that alternative is like.
That alternative is somebody comes in, rapes your wife, kills your children,
and then buries you in the backyard.
That's the alternative.
I think a lot of people forget that or haven't seen that,
especially our generation as a younger amount of Americans and Canadians
who may not have been off to war recently.
And with that, ladies and gentlemen, please give it up for Zoltanistan.
Thank you.
So...
Oh, yeah.
I asked Zoltan that before the first time he was.
Let me just ask you the last question I ask everybody,
that if you come across an intelligent alien from a different civilization,
what would you say is the worst thing humanity has done,
and what would you say is humanity's greatest achievement?
Well, look, I think the greatest achievement would say would be that
we have discovered love.
I think love is very important in terms of democracy,
in terms of ideologies of why we do things like come together and want to help.
Without this mammalian idea of wanting to help one another,
empathy and compassion, then I think we would be out to lunch.
This is going to be one of the biggest challenges
about teaching machines and artificial intelligence.
How do you actually get a robot to love something and really love it,
like want to defend it, want to give up its life for it,
want to do some of these different things?
I think the worst thing that we have done as a society,
I don't mean to bash religion, but I'm going to just say,
I think the worst thing we've done recently,
at least in the last few millennia,
is that we've formalized religion to such a point
that it's now become our outlook on everything in life.
You cannot wake up in the morning in America
and I salute the flag under God or it's on our money.
It's everywhere. Our biggest holidays are about Jesus.
It's insane to me that our biggest holidays are not about scientists
or about innovation, things that have changed people's lives.
The guy who made IVF, now we have 4 million extra babies
because an innovator out there said,
you know what, we can do test tube babies, we can create more life.
These should be the holidays that we celebrate as national holidays.
And unfortunately, we live in a country in a western world
so very Judeo-Christian that I worry it's been holding back innovation
for a long time.
It's not that it needs to be fundamentally atheist at all.
No, I wouldn't want that either.
But I just feel like America, like I said,
our entire government believes in an afterlife.
No wonder they don't care about transhumanism.
No wonder they don't care about living far longer
because they believe there's an afterlife out there
and they're going to be singing with angels as soon as they die.
You know, I don't believe that at all.
.
