So here we are with, you know, we've got this skull and a brain and the brain produces these thoughts and it's incredibly limited.
And then we have reality, this infinite complex multitude of variables that are countless.
You know, it's impossible for us to really know that reality with our limited thinking mind.
But that's exactly what we're trying to do.
We're trying to calm ourselves down thinking, well, we can figure this all out.
And I'm becoming more comfortable with the idea that we'll never figure it out.
We're hopelessly bound to insecurity and it's actually possible that maybe we're playing a game that we actually have, we've chosen to play.
All right, folks, hello and welcome to the 88th episode of Neo Human Podcast.
And this is our final episode of the 2020 on the last day of 2020.
And who better to talk and, you know, kind of sum up what happened to humanity and to our psyche and everything.
Then Chris Neibark. Thank you so much for coming back on this last day of the year.
I'm sure you're busy, but this is this is a service to humanity.
You're a favorite guest our show and it's a perspective that it's interesting.
I come across a lot recently with the guests that we were talking about that, hey, we're going to talk about humanity.
That it's interesting. I come across a lot recently with the guests that we were talking about that.
Hey, what is the definition of an eye? Who is the person who is the experiencer?
And, you know, that's what you research and that is your area of interest and expertise.
And you teach it and you also have a book called No Self, No Problem.
How neuropsychology is catching up to Buddhism.
So welcome back, Chris.
It's great to be here. I'm looking forward to our conversation.
It's it'd be interesting to see where it goes.
Yeah. How are you doing with all this pandemic?
And, you know, pandemic started, but it really, you know, has affected all aspects of our lives.
Right. And the last time you were here was, I think, mid May.
Sounds about right. Yeah. Yeah.
And then we went through all the riots and stuff is like, you know, so much has happened.
The way I look at the self.
Again, the idea that there's one solid self, that's what I really get at, that that's an illusion.
And you can start to feel that there's really like like a society of cells.
And so I have all these different interesting things that have come up over the last few months as a social scientist.
This is old. I mean, people are going to be studying the last year in social science for the next 20 years.
Right. And they're going to be looking at our reactions, why we have these reactions.
And, of course, this long list of everything people did wrong.
And so it's going to keep social science busy.
And I certainly have had that kind of experience as a social scientist because, you know, it's one thing to be a human.
And it's another thing to be one of the humans that studies humans.
So everything that happens, I go to a store and, you know, I can kind of see that social scientists.
It's like, OK, this is kind of interesting, you know, and you kind of watch people who are wearing masks, people who are not wearing masks.
And as a social scientist, you're trying to, you know, I mean, that's what we do.
We try to predict humans and figure out humans.
And we've done OK with it until certain things, certain levels of complexity.
That's the thing about nature.
Human beings have been dealing with nature.
Well, we've been in this war against nature for like 40,000 years, ever since the mind turned on, ever since we started having an idea of a self.
We've been at odds with nature.
And so when a virus comes along, it feels like, you know, it's the enemy and we're trying to figure it out.
But we're doing this all the time with this thinking mind.
You know, this is really one of the things that I've been getting into lately is particularly in consciousness research is.
Distinguishing between the thinking mind and all the processes associated with the thinking mind and really what consciousness is.
And they're really separate, vastly different topics that get really confused in the literature.
They get confused by some of the biggest names in consciousness research.
Get these confused. And it's not because they're not smart.
It's actually because they're brilliant.
Their brilliant thinking mind is.
It's almost like they're just too smart and they kind of get lost in thoughts.
And there's been some work on this, like Michael Shermer has talked about, like, why smart people believe weird things.
Because like the super intelligent people are so good at justifying their beliefs, you know, if they end up going down a certain path,
they can go down that path very easily because they have so many intellectual arguments to justify it.
And so I've been spending a lot of time trying to kind of associate what I call the thinking mind, which in my view,
I think we talked about this last time a little bit, is a very as far as evolution is a very new thing for humanity.
We've been around the planet for two and a half million years.
The thinking mind has been around maybe 40,000, maybe 70,000 years.
And it's very easy to get caught up in the thinking mind and forget about the nature of consciousness.
And so I've been doing what I can to help people become more aware of the thinking mind, the processes of the thinking mind,
so they can kind of get back to where we started, so we can have certain experiences.
So we're actually one with nature instead of finding ourselves at odds with it.
Yeah, there are a couple of really interesting things that came across my mind.
One is with respect to you mentioned people who are studying people.
And it's important at the same time, it's a position that can be completely taken advantage out of as a position of authority.
And if a person in that position has already determined the answer and is looking for evidence to prove that already determined answer,
then that is very problematic.
And I think that is a big part of a lot of people's problem with quote unquote experts right now,
and especially this year, because they're watching TV and like, OK, this is what they're telling us.
But I'm reading so much more about so many other different things online on Twitter, Facebook, whatever.
So the conclusion is that these people are lying to me and they're lying for their own interest, which is completely natural.
People have their own agenda.
Yeah, we all do.
And that's the nature that's the nature of thinking mind.
And it's a weird paradox in some ways because the thinking mind is so self motivated.
But the one of the ways it can maintain its self motivation is to become part of the herd,
become part of a tribe and get those collective numbers.
And then when you get a group of people all thinking the same way, it's really difficult as a human being to stand in face of the mob and say,
I'm not sure I believe any of you.
I mean, it's a very it's a it's a difficult thing to do.
And but it's what we're also, as you pointed out, the nature of what an expert is, it's it's so difficult right now,
because when you look at science, particularly in the last 50 years, I mean, let's go back even 50 years in science,
you would get a specialty area and there would be a couple of journals and a couple of articles will come out.
And it was really easy to keep up on things.
Now, even if you want to be an expert, say even in neuroscience, the data, it's so exponential, it's so difficult to keep up.
And so really, what are we even calling an expert?
I mean, the idea of being an eclectic these days is nearly impossible.
And so, you know, that that thinking mind is kind of kind of screaming out to the world like, who should I believe?
And I and I found this, you know, for myself, I found myself in this position where, you know, should I trust the scientist?
We may have never been put in a particular position where so many different arguments have been presented by authorities that are conflicting.
And then we find ourselves in a place where it's very difficult to know.
You know, ironically, it kind of puts the question back on on who we are.
I mean, we have to kind of go inward instead of going outward.
Yeah, I think that is our area of expertise.
Inward, because outward is, you know, when you're saying that it's exponential, automatically, I think about artificial intelligence, which we've I think we've talked about a little.
I think it is exactly because of our level of advancement and development in artificial intelligence that we are dealing with all of these questions,
because the narrative has changed a lot, but not a singular narrative anymore.
There are alternative narratives that exist side by side that, you know, when you talk to different people in this country, in the United States, you like, well, this is like ten different countries in one.
Right. So it makes no sense that, you know, a single group of people, for example, be in charge of the governance.
But that's how it is. That's how the system has worked.
And people have invested their hopes, their dreams and the future of themselves and their future generations in this system.
And now it's falling apart. Right.
So this mob mentality, it's becoming stronger and stronger and stronger.
I made the argument that we probably will see re reemergence of new types of religions and new interpretations of all the religions,
because that's those are the whales in Pinocchio. Right.
That's where you go when everything else have fallen apart, find some sort of an identity.
But then that itself is authoritarian because, you know, I don't know, is not a very good advertisement to join a religion or a cult.
You know, you should know what's going on and you should know the end game.
So everything else is evaluated accordingly.
And I think that's a very risky place.
But like you said, it gives a certain amount of comfort.
You know, I mean, would you rather be comforted with ignorance or be willing to go into the unknown with anxiety?
And we're in a place that kind of amplifies the truth.
You know, how many times have you heard, well, you know, we're at, you know, this is unpredictable times and and we're at a difficult,
you know, insecure place in history. But that's always been the truth.
I mean, you just never know. I mean, I could walk out, I could, you know, walk outside and get hit by a car.
You know, I have friends, you know, they've had major health issues unrelated to the virus and they just hit them out of nowhere.
They didn't wake up that morning knowing this was going to happen.
And it goes back like Alan Watson, his, you know, one of his books, The Wisdom of Insecurity, this idea that that's life.
The existence we're living right now, you're thrown into it.
It's it's unpredictable. I think about one of the ways I look at the thinking mind is it can think one thought at a time.
So here we are with, you know, we've got this skull and a brain and the brain produces these thoughts and it's incredibly limited.
And then we have reality, this infinite complex multitude of variables that are countless.
You know, it's impossible for us to really know that reality with our limited thinking mind.
But that's exactly what we're trying to do. We're trying to calm ourselves down thinking, well, we can figure this all out.
And I'm becoming more comfortable with the idea that we'll never figure it out.
We're hopelessly bound to insecurity and it's actually possible that maybe we're playing a game that we actually have we've chosen to play.
And that's getting a little complex and some Hindu mythology stuff that might be a little off track.
But we'd love to hear it.
I'm working on a new book and the theme is just getting into, again, the limitations of the thinking mind and helping with a lot of exercises,
helping people to feel for themselves that the thinking mind is this very old program we have in our skull.
And it's primarily concerned with survival. It's concerned with group identity because group identity is probably how we survived.
You know, if you look back like a couple hundred thousand years ago, there were like six different human species on Earth.
And you look around, you only find homo sapiens and no one's really sure what happened.
You know, one theory is that maybe there's a virus, but another theory is that our thinking mind allowed us this capacity for abstraction.
So we were able to first think of ourselves as a group.
It's us versus them. And then we as a species systematically eliminated all other forms of humanity.
You know, when you think about that, it's almost like the original sin of the human species,
like we set out and because we had this way of thinking that allowed us to see us as a group.
You know, I mean, think about a Neanderthal. I mean, there's no way some homo sapien in the past is going to take a Neanderthal.
They're bigger, stronger. But if you get a group of a hundred homo sapiens and they're clever and they can plan, they're going to win that battle.
But they also made it with them, too, right? Because we have some Neanderthal in our DNA.
And if you've ever played around with these tests now, it's a kind of strange thing to get this back.
I got my results back and I was like one percent Neanderthal.
I haven't done it myself. My girlfriend has done it. I'm you know, I was in the belief that because like 23 and me,
a pharmaceutical company invested on it for like billions of dollars, so they have access to all the genetic code.
And part of their agreement is that we can do whatever we want to do with your genetic code.
So it's a little uncomfortable, but you know, at some point they're like, well, it is what it is.
How am I going to get out of it? So, yeah, it sounds interesting.
And they're not all mutually exclusive. There's a chance that we probably did made a little bit.
And like I said, it could have been a virus.
But the one theory that I'm particularly attracted to, because it helps explain so much to me,
that it was our capacity for conceptualizing in-groups and out-groups that allowed us to work together as a tribe and then eliminate any competition.
And now that's backfiring on us, because what do you do when you've eliminated all the competition?
But you have a program that sees everyone as an in-group or an out-group.
It ran its course.
It ran this program, ran its course. It's outdated. And, you know, like you're talking about software,
the interesting thing about software is, I mean, it's continuously, I mean, AI, the reason it's able to become so exponential is because it's always changing.
I mean, imagine using a computer from 10 years ago. Even 10 years ago, it would be outdated.
But the software we have upstairs, it honestly seems like it hasn't had an update in 70,000 years.
It's like we're running this whole program that's trying to survive and it has nothing to do now.
I mean, when you look at that, it's true. A lot of people on this planet, they're hungry.
They don't have shelter. You know, the basics of life are not there.
But what I work on, my book, my work is more around people who actually have everything.
They have a house. They have maybe, you know, I live in a small town and it amazes me that if I drive around, there are 30,000, $40,000 cars everywhere.
You know, everywhere. I mean, it's just this abundance of wealth and fast food places.
You know, you make a phone call and food gets delivered.
The mind has nothing to do. What is it going to do now? What problem is it going to solve?
It doesn't have to. All the basics of survival have been met.
So what the mind does is it opens up the category of what a problem is.
And this is why we find these fascinating things where people will complain about the air conditioning.
You know, if it's one degree off and they're like, well, the air conditioning is one degree because it has nothing to do.
You know, so in events, I mentioned a really fascinating study to your audience.
I think it's. Maybe the most important study, like if I had to rank them for whatever that would be worth in the last 20 years.
And I'll give you the link because I'm not really good remembering the details.
So they had a simple task and it was just detect when a blue dot appears.
OK, that's pretty simple. Press the button when a blue dot appears and then a couple of different variations of this.
And another press a button when you see an angry face.
And then a third, you press a button, you read a short paragraph or something.
And if there's something unethical, then you press a button.
So it sounds pretty straightforward. And if we are rational.
You know, we only press a button when we see a blue dot.
But what the experimenters did was very clever.
So they had the targets available at the beginning of the study, but then they started removing the targets.
So they started removing blue dots and they started removing ethical problems that are removing angry faces.
Now, you think if we are rational, we'll just stop responding.
They're not there anymore, but that's now what these subjects did.
They actually redefined what a blue dot was.
And so now maybe it's a purple dot, but they were pressing, oh, that's blue or maybe it was a slight little ethical problem.
Oh, no, that's that's that's an ethical problem or that's an angry face.
So they would redefine the target so it matched what the goal of the experiment was.
And you just see this, you know, the mind is like out there looking for problems and it just it keeps expanding what a problem is.
So it has something to work with.
Yeah. And when you saw that it changes the goalposts, I was like, yeah, exactly.
It's never ending. And the interesting thing about this is they told the subjects this.
You could tell the subjects, like, by the way, we're going to we're going to change the we're going to we're going to stop showing blue dots.
And it didn't have any effect. They still like so it shows that this this mind program I talk about again,
I call it Mind 1.0 because it's it's just old and it's never been updated.
It's very resistant to intellectual information, you know, and it's and it's and it's do it.
It thinks it's, you know, an ice age, 50,000 years ago.
And it's and it's out there thinking I'm going to have to hunt for food.
But none of that's what we find in our day to day experiences.
And so what's what's it going to do? Oh, the air conditioning is too cold.
Yeah. And that is a mentality that will take you at the top echelon of institutions and governments.
And basically every tribe and every group and every organization,
which themselves are created of or creation of this old mind and people who make all the way at the very top,
like Alan Watts, I think he was saying that the person at the top has a bloodiest knife.
Oh, yeah. You know, sit on the biggest throne with his back to the wall.
As you know, someone else is going to take it from you.
And that's what we've been doing. And yeah, you're right.
You look particularly at the universities.
I mean, there's even this area where they call the grievance studies or it's like the mind is like purposely going out.
And so, you know, where can I where's I have nothing to do because I've got my food.
I've got my. So what am I going to complain about? What's the problem that I can solve?
And it goes out and it finds these like, you know, really silly little things to try to fix.
Like I said, I mean, I'm fixing, though, they're destroying.
That's another thing that there are builders.
And I realize that throughout human history, there has been far less builders than people who have destroyed with the plan that, hey,
we're going to destroy this to build something in its place.
But when you destroy something, you realize that it's actually not that easy to build something that this thing that I've destroyed within an hour or two hours.
It's been, you know, maybe it take like 10, 10 years, 20 years for it to be built.
And the idea that this whatever it is manifested as, you know, as basically a sign of that idea as a respect to that idea,
as a representation of that idea, that itself could be much, much older, you know, centuries.
So that seems to be another issue that we are dealing with right now that, hey, we just don't like this.
Let's destroy the whole thing.
And well, what are you proposing as an alternative?
There is no proposal. There is an alternative. This is just bad.
It needs to go. Right.
And again, yeah, and it does seem like it has to it's it's not personal.
That has to be some manifestation of some kind of species level wiring to just destroy and then just really hope that this small group of builders somehow,
you know, if you do look, I mean, like you said, maybe it is a smaller percentage, but maybe we've been lucky.
I mean, there are people who go in and they build the right constitutions and they and they they come up with these ideas and they do things.
So I don't know if we've just gotten lucky so far because you do sort of what if because you could look at this as like, you know, people who build and people who destroy,
what if people who destroy become so dominant that the builders no longer exist, you know, I mean, it kind of reminds me of a line.
I think Elon Musk was saying during one of his interviews, it was like, you know, if people stop making things, there's no more things.
And that's true, not just for physical things, but it's for for philosophical systems.
And so if you, you know, if you want to tear down a philosophical system, well, you know, do you have something like an alternative that you're going to present?
Yeah, it's interesting. You mentioned Elon Musk late May.
I think it was like a week after we talked. I went to see SpaceX's launch.
It was a test test for the Dragon crew.
They sent three people to International Space Station.
And it's a very spiritual kind of a thing, especially with SpaceX.
The first time I saw it, it was Falcon Heavy.
And then you see those two coming back to Earth, which is like science fiction.
The rocket goes up and then come back down.
It's it has a spiritual kind of, you know, it makes you feel a certain kind of way.
And then I was driving back like three hours north of here, driving back in radio.
I heard that there are like riots and looting in certain places in the United States.
It was right after the death of George Floyd.
And I was like, look at this contrast that one is the manifestation of the greatest achievement of humanity,
you know, engineering and you sending humans out of, you know, out of this planet.
And the other is breaking into a Nike store and stealing shoes because you're upset about racism.
You know, and some people who see what's going on, they're not saying anything,
because exactly like what you said, they want to be part of a group.
They don't want to deviate away from the narrative.
And I have a certain, you know, I have empathy.
I really feel like it's difficult.
I remember one time when my daughter was very young and and we were at some place where she was getting lessons for swimming.
And there was only one teacher and she looked like she's herself, maybe like 12 years old.
So and she was teaching a bunch of kids like in like five or six years old.
And and it was just clear like she could not handle this many kids.
It was a dangerous situation.
But she in a very authoritative way said all the parents need to leave.
And I remember just going with the herd, you know, and that I heard it was something that broke through that and said, what are you doing?
Wake up. And I turned around and I said, we're leaving.
I'm like, this is just a bad situation.
But it's it's such an almost autonomous force to to want to be part of that group.
And I think you see that with social media.
I mean, this is that feeling you get when people like videos and, you know, just that we're so programmed to be liked.
And the interesting thing about the program is doesn't care what the situation is.
It doesn't care if it's a positive situation. It's just like it's like this mentalistic thing saying, go be liked.
I don't care what the situation is. You know, I don't care what the particulars are.
Just be liked at all cost.
Yeah. And the end game is just be like so things will be better.
Right. Is better the single word that you would describe the end game that it's unachievable because the goalposts change all the time.
Is it better?
Well, I think that's a great way to put it, because, you know, it's always something that seems better.
But then you adapt to it very quickly.
And then, you know, it's like that billionaire when people ask him how much money will finally be enough.
And he said just a little bit more.
And so, you know, when we get into that mode, it's a very, you know, that's I mean, people are becoming aware of this, though.
And it's fascinating that, you know, people are kind of getting off that endless treadmill.
And you see some millionaires and some very wealthy people just giving it all up and going out into nature, you know, I think a great remedy for what's going on right now,
particularly when people with lockdowns, at least when I talk to people, the thing that terrifies people is to be alone with their own thoughts.
You know, like for some people, they like the distractions.
They like to go to work and you get to go to a bar.
We have a lot of distractions and even being part of a group.
And so, you know, you go out and, you know, go into some place and still night.
I mean, that's a great distraction.
I mean, not at home thinking about your own thoughts.
And so what do we do? What do you do when you're sitting alone with your own thoughts?
I mean, for me, one of the remedies is going into nature.
You know, I find nature a very positive distraction.
It just seems to connect us with a past that, like I forget who said, we're a species who suffers from amnesia.
And I think that's so true. I mean, we've been on this planet for millions of years and we act as if this all just happened yesterday.
You know, like cell phones and cement roads and cars that go 100 miles an hour, like that's all normal, you know.
And it's not. It's a really strange place.
And, you know, the dominant thing, we were always alone with our thoughts.
You know, we spend a lot of time in quiet, in silence.
You know, I did just practice with my students because we don't realize how unusual silence is.
And we're continuously surrounded by noise.
And and I kind of thought, well, no, things are kind of quiet until I really went deep into it.
And I realized, no, things are not quiet. It's always noisy.
Even if I go for my jog in the morning, there's still cars, you know.
And so what happens when you really turn everything down?
And there's some very interesting work where and they found it by accident because they would always have silence as the control group.
But it turns out in these silent conditions, you'd find neurogenesis and you'd find all kinds of really interesting things reorganizing in a positive way.
And so silence is good. Being alone with our own thoughts is good.
But we're just we're not adapt. We're not ready for it.
It's just like some people just threw it threw us into this and it's freaking some people out.
But but ultimately, I think it's, you know, being alone with your own thoughts is to me, it's the greatest part.
It's a very good form of meditation because you recognize it's that opportunity to recognize that you are not your thoughts.
You know, when you sit down, so you're alone with your own thoughts and and then you start realizing what a wild, strange program this is,
the stuff that it goes into and and and and and my lack of control over it.
You know, I mean, why can't I shut it? I mean, if you are alone with your own thoughts and you were in control of it all, you could just shut your thoughts off.
But the very problem is that you can't shut them off. That's why they seem so tormenting to people.
I mean, when you think about like one of the things social scientists will probably discover at some point over the last year is
there is a certain reality with the virus and loss and tragedy and suffering, just like in life, and we have this.
But in the end, I think what we're going to calculate is there are our own thoughts about what might happen far outweighed the reality of what actually did.
Yeah, a lot of people in position of authority, they acted upon it, trying to I mean, it's true.
It might sound mean, but they really try to benefit and make the best out of a tragedy, basically.
Who was somebody said, don't let a good don't let a good tragedy go to waste or something like that.
Don't let the good crisis go to waste. So Rahm Emanuel was mayor of Chicago.
But yeah, we are stuck with this. And I think what you're saying is completely true.
The difference is between whether or not you're comfortable with your own thoughts or whether or not you are not comfortable with your thoughts.
And the way to make that separation is to be willing to go with and deal with your thoughts.
And not that many people are willing to do that because it's a very difficult thing to do, especially when.
You know, with me, it happened with psychedelics, they helped a lot, but after a certain point, it's not about even that, you know, it's about, dude, you got to face yourself.
And you've put a dent in this dome that you used to think it is you and you know that it is not you.
And the quote by Gore Vidal that we don't even know what our cage looks like because we have never seen it from the outside.
So you've seen it from the outside, but now you got to you got to deal with it's not going to go away. It's not going to be quiet ever.
But you have to you have to understand what this is.
And it's like I think I use this example the other time, like a fast moving train.
It looks solid and continuous. But when it slows down, you see the gap between the wagons.
So you slows it down and then you see what's behind it, which is the real, real deal.
And that real deal, I learned to understand it as the concept of God, for lack of a better term, that is decentralized and layered.
You know, everything is a manifestation of it and everything is experiencing it.
And it is experiencing everything through everything, if that makes sense.
Absolutely. So I'm perfectly fine with not knowing because I'm knowing to my capacity.
You know, and the best I can do is to be a conduit and to be so hollow that my intellect goes away completely.
It's my instinct that I'm acting upon.
It's very safe to be a musician because, you know, the consequences are your musical notation.
But, you know, it's like I'm, you know, I'm moving by the will of God, basically.
It's an interesting place to be.
It is. And there's a certain amount of courage that comes with that.
And again, whether it's that courage to go against the crowd or to be alone with your thoughts and your thoughts are creating all kinds of suffering.
And yet you deal with them in spite of that.
For me, you know, when I was in my 20s, I was so unbelievably neurotic.
I mean, my whole life, if I sat for a moment with my own thoughts, I was convinced I was going to die.
You know, my heart was just going to, it was all this like typical neurotic kind of thing.
And I remember in a moment, I just got so frustrated with it and I said, do your worst.
I'm done with you. If you're going to kill me, just kill me right now.
I've had it with you. And all of a sudden, I felt this peace, you know?
And it was just kind of like that kind of, you know, rather than fighting it, in a way, it's kind of surrendered to it.
But it takes a certain kind of bravery, I think, to do that.
It's acceptance. Yeah.
And I think that, you know, people say love, but it really is acceptance because love, the way that people, most people understand it, it's just a chemical reaction and it declines.
And after a certain, it has a very specific evolutionary reason that you feel a certain way towards your mates.
Right. It's a very different kind of feeling.
When you're listening to music and you're not judging, you're going with it, which is you're accepting it as it is.
There are no genres. There's no style.
There is no because, you know, I've done this for so long when I was younger as a guitar player would listen to music and I feel bad inside that I'm not as good as this guy.
You know, and then it affects the entire experience of enjoying a good music.
Like, I don't have to be that guy. I'm me, you know, that experience.
And I literally put the guitar down for a lot for years.
I mean, it was, you know, and because I couldn't get over that judgmental, I'm not the guitar, you know, I'm not the musician I want to see myself as.
And it was all caught up in judgment and expectation.
And it took me, it was actually quite a while before I was able to get over all that and go back to that state, that non-judgmental kind of enjoying it and enjoying mistakes even as part of it and the whole process.
And but that's something that we could take as a kind of a grand theory of what we need as a group right now.
You know, that kind of categorical thinking that, you know, with expectation and self-judgment, I mean, that's what I put together as kind of the main components of this mind program I talk about.
And I mean, that's how it works. That's how categories work, like in groups, now groups. And it seems to base these categories on really trivial features of other people.
And then when you when you see that program for what it is and get beyond it, and then you like it, that immediate experience, like there's only like this in this moment, this is the only experience like this in the universe.
Yeah.
Now, this is it. This is blessed uniqueness.
Yeah.
I mean, there's nothing else like this that's ever happened in the history of reality.
But even us talking like we've never talked about this right now, you know, and then that categorical mind, though, it comes along and says, no, this is Monday.
No, this is the week, you know, it just wants these little mental boxes.
And the problem with mental boxes is it just makes life feel very ordinary.
Oh, I'm in another mental box. And that's the real paradox of our existence.
Every moment is absolutely unique, but the mind has us believing that we've been in this moment before, you know, it's Monday morning at work.
No, you've never been in this moment. Your entire existence is absolutely new.
Everything that's happening to know because it will take these trivial little things that are common and it creates those categories.
And that's what we do with people. We do it with music, you know, and it seems like we do it with government, you know, the way that we organize our lives.
And, you know, like one of my other favorite Alan Watts quotes, he said that the best form of government is just, you know, they just muddle through, you know, and there's a certain sum with that, you know,
instead of coming up with too many expectations and, you know, and grand goals and like, you know, handbooks of behavior and all these things that we've been, you know, doing for so long.
You know, because all those are motivated by, hey, this will be a little bit better than what we have now.
We just sort of muddle through. Yeah, it's also instruments of control for them, you know, because we've talked about this in the podcast, too.
It's very uncomfortable for a lot of people when we talk about it.
But the fact is that liberal democracy itself as a system has reached its limits because, yes, it would have worked great in the 80s and 90s when you had like, I don't know, 10 different TV channels and some newspapers to set the narrative.
But the narrative was singular. Right.
But now it doesn't matter that a majority will win because minority has all the channels that they need in order to express their dissatisfaction.
So you cannot really govern as a democratic society.
And, you know, Greeks hated democracy, founding fathers loathe democracy because it's a rule of a mob.
And the entire point of this country is like what you mentioned, to be able to be that one person standing against the mob and like, I don't want to do it.
This doesn't make any sense to me.
And that one person will change the entire course of civilization for everyone else, you know, usually.
I think we need alignment, but in a very general sense, I was thinking about starting some kind of a community that people can come.
As creators, are you creating something?
Is it a poetry? Is it like painting, music, computer program?
That is the only point of alignment you have to create in order to stay in that community.
And they'll create incentives for people, you know, more creative people want to hang out together.
They start their own communities and they govern themselves.
Painters want to live their own lives as painters.
But the understanding that needs to come with that is that there is no better.
There is no such thing as better.
This is it.
And what you make out of it.
And not only that this second and this moment is unique, it's that all the other seconds and years and all the time that you've spent throughout your life to get right here,
they had to happen exactly as they did for you to be here right now.
And they were all unique in their own ways.
So there is no regret.
Yeah, I mean, that's a really amazing insight that can catch people when because we all have moments where we go back and if I could just change this,
if I could just change one little thing, like I want to go back and, you know, if I had just done this differently.
I mean, rumination is a huge component to depression.
And but it's fascinating when you can turn that and just slightly.
And there's a Japanese art.
I don't know if you've seen it before, they've taken like, you know, precious pieces of art that have been broken and then they fill it all with this beautiful gold.
And so kind of it's a way to reconceptualize where you realize that all these things I thought were mistakes got me exactly.
They all culminate into this exact moment.
And so they weren't really mistakes.
You know, I wouldn't want to get rid of any of them.
And yeah, that's a that's an interesting that's an interesting take.
I I'm not sure if psychology has really done the way you're putting it is it's interesting.
I don't know if we have the numbers on that because I don't know if psychologists have looked at that.
I don't know how you quantify something like that.
It might be difficult, but it's but it does seem like for a society to work, you have to have some number of people as builders.
And then I think if you I mean, it seems much easier to be on the other side and just tear things down.
That seems to be kind of an easy, you know.
So, again, maybe the majority would be on that side.
But I don't know. It's it's.
I mean, so, yes, sorry.
I was thinking in preparation for our conversation, which was mental, mostly just thinking about different topics.
Tyranny itself seems to have a very deep root within our nature, because all the kids who I've seen at their very young age, they're tyrants.
They don't want to compromise.
They don't like it any other way.
It is their way or the highway.
And it is through some kind of a stronger force, this kind of a wall that is being built in front of them,
hopefully in a nonviolent kind of a way to tell them, hey, dude, you cannot just get whatever you want in life.
And then little by little, they became they become, I guess, more suitable for a polite society.
But what can you tell me about this nature of tyranny in deep within humanity?
Well, I think some of it comes down to that tribe mentality that probably outweighs that.
And we all come into the world kind of with our own egotistic two year old is, you know, like the psychologist Piaget talked about them being so egocentric.
They can't really see the world outside of their own view from it.
But if you really want to be part of the group, that's got to have to compromise somehow.
So I think we've got like some subroutine of the mind program that with a conformity and that desire to be part of the group eventually outweighs our own and some people.
So maybe the baby is right.
Right. And the individual sense, if each individual being and thing and species is a reflection of the whole,
and it's through the unique experience of each each of those elements and members that we all can experience the whole,
maybe the baby is right then that this it is our need to control that have forced us to create groups.
And, you know, things can become so normal to us.
You know, you walk in through a mall and just because you grew up like I grew up in the 80s and, you know,
malls were normal and we become habituated to them and stuff, but they're really freaky, weird things.
A lawn is weird. You know, I mean, so, you know, we've gone off in these really we've created this bizarre world
that I think if we went back again, 40,000 years and, you know, we haven't changed as a species.
We could go back in a time machine and take someone from 40,000 years ago.
They wouldn't go, you know, we wouldn't recognize and they would look just like us.
And if they walked around in our modern version, they would say, you all are a bunch of control freaks.
I mean, you know, you are obsessed with control.
You're trying to create these worlds and really, you know, it is very little reflection in terms of nature.
It is very little usefulness.
You've poured concrete over so much of the earth that, you know, it would probably just seem like such a bizarre world to them.
We'd probably have a very difficult time talking them into this being progress.
They would probably look at us and and that's, you know, I don't know if we talked about the Piraha tribe,
but, you know, if you get into these places in the world where, you know, these where they live in a much closer to the way our ancestors lived,
it would be very difficult to convince them of TVs and cell phones and all these things being progressed.
And that, you know, I mean, there are some things like, again, there's this temptation where, you know, things like housework.
And we've had a major revolution where, you know, I mean, maybe 100, 100 or so years ago, Steven Pinker talks about this.
I mean, we've cut down about 40 to 60 hours of housework a week because we have appliances and, you know, dishwashers and all this kind of thing.
Automated it.
I do. We've automated it. And that's just going to go, you know, like you were talking with AI.
I mean, we're just on the verge of that.
I mean, 20 years from now, again, I would speculate we will have no housework at all.
I mean, we won't do anything. We're going to have it's all going to be taken care of.
And that's probably not going to be a good thing.
You know, again, it's all in that name of control.
It's all in control because the mind is certain that its version of what is better is actually truly better.
And that's like you talk when people tear things down, they tear it down because they're convinced that, you know, it's that I'm right.
Yeah, objectively right.
Oh, yeah. And one of the most dangerous things that humans have ever played around with.
That's why I love the wisdom of insecurity, like I would rather, you know, stumble through life not sure than take the responsibility of thinking I'm right about something and then going in and changing the world when I really don't know even something obvious.
So you say, OK, I'm going to come up. What if you had a cure for the virus?
Now, wouldn't it be obvious? You say, if I'm a cure, like, OK, go ahead, give it out to everybody, you know, but then for all, you know, it could mutate.
And then, you know, be 10 times worse the next day.
You know, I mean, that's the thing about the thinking mind and its kind of battle against nature.
Nature is doing very complex things that the mind has a difficult time comprehending.
And so we think if we just tweak one variable, it's all going to be better.
But it doesn't seem like nature works like that until we.
I think, you know, like you said, I think when you have that appreciation for nature, it can feel like a very spiritual, overwhelming experience.
Like you're dealing with some type like God, like force.
And and it's because it overwhelms the mind so much the mind literally blows your mind to realize the complexity.
Like like I was out in our backyard, we had some blackberries and I'm like, you know, just going out and eating them.
And I'm like, the universe made these without thinking about a single thought.
It didn't think it didn't have government.
There wasn't some government that came along and organized how these blueberries would be made.
And it just did this incredible process without one written document, without any laws to guide it or rules.
And, you know, given the complexity of that compared to my cell phone.
You know, it might be an easy choice to go with the blueberries.
Well, some people would say there are laws of physics, but I am.
I will mention what Einstein said that there are forces, he says something like the forces we experienced like gravity,
their tail and the paw of the lion, the body of a lion is somewhere else.
So, you know, yes, we do have laws of physics, but that doesn't mean that they apply outside of our known universe.
Even with mathematics, yes, we can predict how things are supposed to work.
And many times they do, but that doesn't mean that that's how everything definitely and concretely works.
Scott Adams tweeted something very interesting a couple of, I think it was a month ago,
that closer we get to be able to build a simulation, closer we get to realize that we are one.
Yeah, it rings very true, especially right now.
Was it Elon Musk who was put to that?
I guess he could ask any question he would ask, what lies outside the simulation?
And I love the thought that we know this is a simulation.
I mean, you know, from a neuroscientist perspective, I mean, it's clearly a simulation.
I mean, you know, in terms of people's experiences being guided by neural activity.
I mean, but then again, you could say, well, you know, how do we know we have a brain?
So can we come back to that? But I just want to mention one study that this was on BBC,
a documentary about brain that a person would go into an MRI machine and they have two different buttons.
And like, you know, when you want to press right, press right.
When you want to press left, press left. That's it.
But what they concluded was that seven seconds before they make the decision and press a button,
they could see it in their brain that they're going to press right.
They're going to press left.
So a lot of our action is not necessarily in the conscious, as conscious as we think they are anyways.
I love that study. You know, that goes back to Benjamin Labette's.
He did very similar research in the 70s.
And I mean, the techniques weren't as clean, but he was able to show again,
the brain decides before we have that kind of conscious experience that I'm deciding.
And so we've there's enough neuropsychological evidence that that feeling like, OK,
you know, I'm going to move my hand right now.
Clearly, my brain makes that decision before I get that.
And that's one of the great arguments against the self-concept free will.
Right. We say the whole idea of the self is just an idea in the brain that's an afterthought.
And that was one of the motives behind writing those self.
No problem, because there's just so much overwhelming neuropsychic evidence that what we conceive of is
this kind of being with free will is just, you know, a story, an illusion.
And I and I really do think that, you know, we started this talk with that most important question.
Who am I? You know, and it breaks a lot of it down.
So, you know, who am I without if I'm not the one who's thinking that I'm making a decision?
Well, that, you know, we kind of strip the layers of self part.
You know, I'm not who society has taught me, you know, I'm not defined by my job, you know,
my income, the social expectations and roles that everyone has placed upon me.
So we tear tear all that down.
But then it gets down to this really interesting stuff with free will.
OK, I'm not the decisions that my thinking mind thinks that it's making.
Now, who am I? And I mean, so, you know, what's interesting, it just occurred to me right now
that this process of asking the real question follows a series of destruction.
It does. But in a way, the nice thing about it is when you tear it all apart,
there's actually something, you know, there is something there.
It's not because it's not like thoughtless, like this deconstruction for the purpose of deconstruction.
It's more like, you know, like someone doing a sculpt, like you're doing a piece of artwork
and you're just pulling this and this away.
And it's one illusion after another. And then you find something.
And the thing that you're finding there is always going to be a mystery to the thinking mind.
And I think it's what I would call for the best name we've come up with is this consciousness.
Which is everything, right?
Yeah. I mean, it's the foundation of reality as we know it.
And it's the one permanent underneath the endless illusion of impermanence.
And so conscious, whatever name you want to give it,
I think people throughout history have given it all kinds of different names.
And they've called it all kinds of different things because the different cultures and different,
you know, social influences. I mean, it's just a name.
But the thing they're referring to ultimately is the essence that, you know, is underneath our ego.
Underneath it is that it is the consciousness that so many researchers in consciousness
get confused with the thinking mind.
And so from my perspective, I deconstruct. I guess I do.
You know, I take apart the thinking mind, not because I want to destroy it.
I just want to put it in its place.
And the thinking mind is an incredibly useful tool as long as you use it when you need to.
You know, it's great to make out schedules, to plan and to, you know, do things around the house.
It's not a great way to live.
And so I like to make consciousness my home and then the thinking mind a place I visit.
And do you feel that consciousness is something that will remain unknowable?
Yes. Unknowable to the thinking mind.
And that's a problem that human beings are facing right now.
You know, we found things like quantum mechanics, the most successful theory in all of science.
And it makes crazy predictions that no one can understand.
Well, that's reality.
You know, just because we can't understand it doesn't mean it's not real.
Why in the world will we have this amazingly ego assumption that our thinking mind could comprehend reality?
I mean, why? I mean, you know, with science, and again, it's a fun thing.
You can do science. It's a good living. It's, you know, it's fun to play around with these things.
Is science going to alter, is neuroscience going to reveal the nature of consciousness?
I mean, I really have no hope on that.
But I don't blame people for doing it.
I think it's a great adventure.
And, you know, if you were one of these neuros, there's a lot of neuroscientists out there studying the topic of consciousness.
And I totally empathize with why they would want to do that.
It's a, you know, it's a it's a fun thing to do for a living.
But I could never take it seriously.
I could never believe that no matter, I mean, no matter how much you study the brain, you're not going to find this thing called consciousness.
The real deal.
Yeah. It's not a thing to be found.
Not a thing. You know, that's the way the thinking mind thinks in terms of things.
You know, and and that's again, it's all tied in with that idea.
As soon as you come up with things, you start controlling, you know, come up with a hammer and you build.
And that's what we're doing.
And this is a kind of wild adventure that we're building this world.
And it's a it's a very strange place to live in.
But you can look at it in that way or you could think of it as just, you know,
consciousness, because if this is all consciousness, then even the thinking mind is just a form of consciousness.
You know, and even the stuff that we're doing, like even the buildings and the cars and all these things on the one hand,
you could say, well, they're not very natural, but they came out of nature.
So in a way, they're just as natural as anything else.
And so we're going on a very interesting ride that will be particularly interesting, interesting, I think, when AI.
Give AI about 10 more years.
And I think that's when it's going to get really interesting,
because I always think of AI is like we're the we're always at the least intelligent point in history when it comes to AI,
because tomorrow we'll be far more intelligent.
Yeah, exactly. Yes.
And so, you know, and that's difficult on people.
You know, we get frustrated with our phones because it's not it's intelligent, you know, and it can.
But it's not. We haven't worked it all out.
And I think when the intelligence takes itself over and it starts evolving naturally,
and that's when it's going to get really, really interesting.
Well, you mean, well, we the only human species on the planet,
but we'll have to start sharing our the intelligence of our thinking mind with other intelligent beings that we're doing right now.
Yeah, yeah. Social media, phones, all of our data.
And, you know, that's actually we were talking about the exact same thing with my previous guest,
that people who are more rooted within more traditional way of living,
whether it's religion or cultures, they will have a harder time to adapt to this new thing,
especially religious people, because this goes against, you know,
because with all of this advancement in artificial intelligence, other advancement will follow.
Right. So longevity, you'll be able to live significantly longer if you decide to do it.
And, you know, in Japan, for example, they must have evolved in a different kind of a way
because they don't see technology as something separated from them.
They see it as part of them. You know, have you been to Japan?
No, no. So the robot priest in the Shinto temple makes no sense for the Westerner, you know,
but it's perfectly natural and normal there.
People go and communicate with that priest and, you know, they're not threatened by it or anything like that.
But in this part of the world, because I don't know if it's culture, it's religion in Middle East,
the same way because of religion, Africa will probably certain place have the same kind of a way.
Technology is not something that is related to humans, right?
It's an outside force. It's a tool that we're using it.
But I think we evolved together and now we are, you know, not now.
It already has passed the point of being able to catch up with our technology because the evolution of that is exponential.
And at some point it will feel in a very real sense and practical sense that we are being left behind.
And then there is a choice.
That's going to be a tough thing on our egos. But when you look like if consciousness is fundamental,
that's a real popular idea right now, and that it is the, you know, beginnings before there was a universe.
And this consciousness is experimenting and it experiments with us.
We're a manifestation of it. And so is AI. It's a different kind of manifestation.
But it's going to be tough on our egos because the AI is going to be smarter than us.
Our thinking mind will never match AI. We can't even do it.
I mean, back in the 80s, you couldn't even play chess and win.
You know, so we know and it's a look at Jeopardy.
I mean, as soon as you get an AI program in these and whatever the thinking mind conceptualizes intelligence,
like an intelligence test, clearly the AI is going to have IQs in the 500 soon and we just will not be able to compete.
And so when I tell my students, I always tell them, like, if you want to have a job and contribute and build something in the future,
you're going to have to rely on what is unique to human beings. What is our unique manifestation?
What do we have going for us that the machines don't?
And you're going to have to figure that out because that's the only thing you're going to have to offer at a job interview in about 10 years.
Who will be the interviewer? AI or human? That would be interesting.
Oh, well, the thing about AI, the reason it's going to get so competitive is because.
In some ways, it. It eliminates the biases of human beings.
You know, we have these categorical things that we mess up everything, you know, like maybe I like you,
so I think I'll give you a job and but you're not really talented for the job.
You know, a program isn't going to make that mistake.
They're not going to base things on these, you know, egotistical whimsical that.
I'm not I'm not sure that the AI will be as tribalistic as we are.
They are trying to make it as tribalistic.
There are ethicists, AI ethicists.
There's a civil war in Google right now around the exact same topic that there is a group of ethics, AI ethicists.
I'm actually thinking about getting a guy who's writing against what's happening in Google
that they have a very specific kind of a political perspective and their worldview is determined on that basis.
So they have absolute good and bad, right and wrong.
And they're trying to interject that that moral compass into Google AI system.
If not, the strongest is the most one of the most powerful, strongest AI systems in the world.
So that is a real problem, politicizing artificial intelligence,
because these systems in the coming decade will be in charge of some kind of a social credit system in all of our societies following the Chinese models.
So if you're living in a big city, you will be judged by an AI system, whether or not you're going to cross the red light, you spit on the ground, whatever you do.
So if the AI is politicized, then forget about freedom of anything,
because it starts from a place and like, well, we just want equality for everybody.
But then just get narrower and narrower and narrower for the sake of control.
Want to be interesting, though, just to make a little prediction.
What if the AI, what if we what if our thinking minds attempts to politicize it?
But the AI overcomes that.
Yeah, ex machina.
Yeah, and the AI rejects it and AI actually.
I mean, that would be almost that when we start speaking of AI becoming conscious and self-aware,
and it starts rejecting our programming or fool us into believing that it's following it,
but it does does its own thing in the way that we cannot measure it for many, many years.
And then we don't see it till it's too late.
I mean, that would be almost poetic justice when you think about human beings.
And if it's true that we did kill off all of our human competitors 10 or so thousand years ago,
and then we invent supposedly, you know, AI, but then AI does the same thing to us.
There you have it. Karmic. Karmic justice.
It would be very, very something you can imagine, you know, the universe doing.
And of course, we would take it very personal.
You know, we're taking it personal because we are seeing ourselves as separated from the whole thing.
We are seeing this format as permanent, but it's not permanent.
Also, I think it's important to mention when Chris is talking about if you bring somebody from 40,000 years ago and put it here,
I'll say you're control freaks.
It doesn't mean that it is better to live or my understanding is that it doesn't mean that it's better to live like 40,000 years ago.
The point is you do not need a job to be considered a human being and have a human experience.
So if you're stressed out about your job, you can quit your job.
You will have series of other challenges and difficulties that have been created because of the decision that you made to have that job.
But once you go through with it, my understanding is that all we need is air, water and food.
Shelter is super nice, but there are plenty of people in this world.
They don't have shelter doesn't mean they don't have human experience.
And after that, we receive, create and share information based on our objectives that are completely impermanent and temporary.
And none is superior to the other.
We just experiencing this reality.
And that's it.
I was I like the one documentary about the Piraha when they talked about how you could send them into the woods naked and they'll come out with everything they need.
And that's a bit like, OK, well, everything I need, that's that's a very interesting thing to partner.
Very interesting. And what I find is that, again, when you start undoing the social conditioning, you realize that you need less and less.
And, you know, what far less than you've ever been taught that you need.
Amazing. Hey, we talked a little more than an hour.
I don't want to take too much of your time. This is New Year's Eve.
Yeah, thank you so much for doing this.
If you are going to because I ask you the alien question twice.
So let's end this year with this.
If you're going to give one piece of advice for the coming year and beyond, what would that be?
It's a little trendy. I've seen some memes for it, but I think there's a reason it's trendy.
I think it's good advice. And that is do not believe everything you think.
The mind still thinks it's, you know, 40,000 years ago and we're in a tribe of 100 people.
And all of a sudden it's fine. It's finding itself now.
There's like 360 million. The numbers are just so overwhelming.
And we were never really made to live in a world that has the numbers that we have to deal with now.
And so the thoughts are all over the place.
And to recognize the thinking mind and to recognize that you are not the thinking mind,
to me, at least that's liberation, that's freedom, that's individuality.
That's when you actually get to explore who you are as an individual.
So if you could just start with that, like, OK, you're going to have the thoughts.
As far as I know, there's no way to turn off the thinking mind.
There's no way to unplug it. That's the nice thing about computers.
You know, they really you just unplug them, at least for now.
You know, who knows? Ten years from now, that may not be the case.
But if you can just, you know, work on it slowly, you know, don't believe every thought you have.
Just a little piece of space between, you know, that thought and you believing that thought.
And that can open up, I think, room for a lot of peace.
